COMMON MISTAKE IN CONTRACT: RARE SUCCESS
AND COMMON MISAPPREHENSIONS
JONATHAN MORGAN *
ABSTRACT . Disputes involving shared mistakes should be resolved by con-
sidering the meaning (explicit and implicit) of the parties ’agreement.
There is no room for a free-standing doctrine of mistake. The argumentis illustrated by considering three recent decisions on common mistake.
K
EYWORDS :contract, common mistake, implied terms.
I. IMPLIED TERMS AND FACTUAL BASIS
Common mistake is a hopeless plea. It succeeds rarely –if not never then at
least “hardly ever ”, one might unoriginally quip following Lord Hailsham
L.C. ’s invocation of the well-bred Captain of the Pinafore .1One can see
why parties might still try. To escape liability for breach, or from theunappetising performance of a bad bargain, would often be useful indeed –
and deciding that an apparent contract was void ab initio permits such an
escape. But when should it be permitted? The problem is scarcely novel.Peter Birks identi ﬁed the fear –in Roman law as today –that disappointed
parties might go about “concocting mistakes ex post facto ”, unsettling
transactions in a way that is undesirable because in commercial life,“successful and e ﬃcient businessmen ”should prosper while those with
bad judgment are rightly “driven to the wall ”. As Professor Birks said, as
true today as in classical Rome, the result is di ﬃcult law, full of “puzzles
and arti ﬁcialities ”.
2
One can press the analogy further. Then as now, some jurists evince
“determination to give no relief at all ”while others accept that contracts
may be avoided for “a very fundamental mistake ”. The latter is the modern
English position. But the “test”is intractable. This problem too vexed the
Roman jurists. As Birks noted, Ulpian sought to “crisp up ”the “spongy
* Senior University Lecturer in Law, University of Cambridge. Address for Correspondence: Corpus
Christi College, Cambridge, CB2 1RH, UK. Email: jem44@cam.ac.uk.
1National Carriers Ltd. v Panalpina (Northern) Ltd. [1981] A.C. 675, 688.
2P.B.H. Birks, The Roman Law of Obligations , E. Descheemaeker (ed.) (Oxford 2014), 76 –77.Cambridge Law Journal ,77(3) , November 2018, pp. 559 –569
doi:10.1017/S0008197318000636
559
notion of fundamentality ”with “a mechanical test ”(viz. error in substantia );
but this was “itself not very satisfactory ”.3
English law has been unable to cast o ﬀthis Roman inheritance.4The test
of whether a mistake is su ﬃciently “fundamental ”remains entrenched. This
has its quaint side. Is vinegar fundamentally di ﬀerent from wine? Does it
matter whether it is wine vinegar (i.e. ex wine, now soured)?5Such ques-
tions have a metaphysical ﬂavour. Yet judges have often refused invitations
to“adventure themselves with philosophers ”, in other branches of private
law.6Understandably so. That they must do so here is faintly embarrassing.
Perhaps for this reason the “fundamental mistake ”issue has been classi ﬁed
as one “not capable of elaborate analysis ”;i ti s “a matter of ﬁrst impres-
sion ”for the court.7The judge knows it when she sees it. Given the
undoubted good sense and sharp minds of the judiciary, why not leave itat that? Still, there is something intellectually unsatisfactory about the
oracular approach, one leaving the validity of contracts dependent entirely
upon that “educated re ﬂex to facts ”which, for Lord Go ﬀ, epitomises the
judicial function.
8
The law can do better. Common mistake cases should be determined by
the meaning of the contract, and nothing else. Of course this approach(“construction ”) is also present in the orthodox test. Unfortunately, it is
additional to the “fundamentality ”inquiry. Since the late 19th Century
the courts have felt it necessary to expound the parties ’intentions using
a“doctrine ”of mistake inspired by Civilian learning.
9But the additional
stage is unnecessary, indeed unhelpful. It would simplify matters to have
just one question: the meaning of the contract. This would revert to an earl-ier common law approach. It would also be in accordance with principle.
On what basis can the court claim a dispensing power to set aside contracts,
when there is no suggestion of impropriety,
10unless giving e ﬀect to the
parties ’expectations? The right question is whether the contract, on its
true construction, was conditional on the existence of the facts which
(it turns out) do not exist.11Contracting parties can (of course) expressly
3Ibid., at p. 77.
4Civilian law was in ﬂuentially relied upon by Blackburn J. in Kennedy v Panama, New Zealand &
Australian Royal Mail Co. (1867) L.R. 2 Q.B. 580. See J. Cartwright, “The Rise and Fall of Mistake
in the English Law of Contract ”in R. Sefton-Green (ed.), Mistake, Fraud and Duties to Inform in
European Contract Law (Cambridge 2005), 67 –73.
5D.18.1.9.2 (Ulpian).
6H.M.S. London [1914] P. 72, 78, per Evans P., quoting Sir F. Pollock (causation). See also e.g. Benham v
Gambling [1941] A.C. 157, 166, per Viscount Simon L.C. (damages for loss of expectation of life).
7Associated Japanese Bank (International) Ltd. v Credit Du Nord S.A. [1989] 1 W.L.R. 255, 263, per
Steyn J.
8Smith v Littlewoods Organisation Ltd. [1987] A.C. 241, 280.
9See Cartwright, “The Rise and Fall of Mistake ”, pp. 67 –73, 81, 84.
10Unconscionable conduct might justify (equitable) relief for mistake. But there seems no good justi ﬁca-
tion for an equitable discretion to avoid contracts in the absence of such impropriety: cf. Solle v Butcher
[1950] 1 K.B. 671.
11This was also Denning L.J. ’s view of mistake at common law: ibid., at p. 691 ( res extincta cases are
“really contracts which are not void for mistake but are void by reason of an implied condition precedent ,560 [2018] The Cambridge Law Journal
include a condition precedent. The “construction ”inquiry seeks to establish
whether such a condition precedent is implicitly part of a contract contain-
ing no express condition. Can a condition precedent be implied “in fact ”?
The implied term approach is unorthodox today. In the leading case of
The Great Peace , Lord Phillips M.R. said that just as the implied term the-
ory had been repudiated by the House of Lords for frustration, so it should
be rejected for common mistake.12While conscious of the high authority
behind both these propositions, they should themselves be rejected. Once
we accept that the meaning of contracts does not depend on what either
party actually (subjectively) believed, thought or intended, there is nonecessary illogicality in implying a term about an unusual occurrence
thatex hypothesi the actual parties had not considered –contrary to the
superﬁcially attractive reasoning in the Davis Contractors case.
13If the
alleged contract ’s binding operation is implicitly dependent on a particular
fact’s existence, on its proper construction, it matters not that the parties
never turned their minds to this point. For that is most assuredly not thetest for implying a term. Lord Ho ﬀmann has warned that what the actual
parties would have thought about a proposed implied term is “irrelevant ”
and speculation about it “barren ”; such an approach risks “diverting atten-
tion from the objectivity which informs the whole process of
construction ”.
14
The implied term approach is superior in principle: implication of terms
is still best conceptualised as making explicit the implicit meaning of a con-
tract.15Any other conception of implication must mean that the court is
going beyond what the agreement meant. A power to “improve ”a particular
contract by adding ad hoc terms would be inconsistent with basic notions of
freedom of contract and the judicial role.
The implied term approach would also enhance common mistake ’s ele-
gance and clarity. There is considerable judicial authority on the implica-
tion of terms. Above all it emphasises restraint –the rarity with which
terms should be implied, especially not into lengthy detailed contractsbetween well-advised commercial parties.
16In his unfairly maligned judg-
ment in the Belize Telecom case,17Lord Ho ﬀmann stressed that the starting
point and “most usual inference ”when a contract is silent on the disputed
point is “that nothing is to happen. If the parties had intended something to
because the contract proceeded on the basic assumption that it was possible of performance ”(emphasis
added)).
12Great Peace Shipping Ltd. v Tsavliris Salvage (International) Ltd . [2002] EWCA Civ 1407, [2003] Q.B.
679, at [70], [73].
13Davis Contractors Ltd. v Fareham Urban District Council [1956] A.C. 696, 728, per Lord Radcli ﬀe.
14Attorney General of Belize v Belize Telecom Ltd. [2009] UKPC 10, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 1988, at [25].
15A. Kramer, “Implication in Fact as an Instance of Contractual Interpretation ”[2004] C.L.J. 384.
16Marks and Spencer plc. v BNP Paribas Securities Services Trust [2015] UKSC 72, [2016] A.C. 742.
17For criticism of Lord Neuberger ’s criticism, see J. McCunn, “Belize It or Not: Implied Contract Terms in
Marks and Spencer v BNP Paribas ”(2016) 79 M.L.R. 1090.C.L.J. 561 Common Mistake in Contract
happen, the instrument would have said so. Otherwise, the express provi-
sions of the instrument are to continue to operate undisturbed. If the
event has caused loss to one or other of the parties, the loss lies where it
falls ”.18
This abstentionism harmonises perfectly with the marked reluctance of
courts to uphold common mistake pleas.19It would be preferable to con-
ceive common mistake within the broader power to imply terms –and sub-
ject to the “strict constraints ”upon that “intrusive ...extraordinary ”
power.20There is no need to view common mistake as a free-standing doc-
trine governed by its own special rules (especially not if those rules requirequasi-metaphysical distinctions between shades of “fundamentality ”).
Legal doctrines, like other entities, should not be multiplied without reason.
If these arguments were accepted, the position would reduce simply to
this. When it is a condition precedent for a contract that certain facts should
exist, those facts ’non-existence entails that the supposed “contract ’s”obli-
gations never came into force. If the condition precedent is express this isstraightforward and obvious. If there is no express condition precedent, the
court will reach that conclusion if and only if such a condition is present as
an implicit term of the contract –something part of the agreement even
though it was left unsaid. It will be di ﬃcult to convince a court that
there was such an implicit term (condition precedent). Most claims that
the parties intended some drastic consequence to follow from a factual mis-take will fail for the usual good reason: if so, why didn ’t they say so? But in
rare cases the plea may succeed, as the third recent case discussed below
indicates. The ﬁrst two cases exemplify the more typical failure to invoke
common mistake in commercial disputes. The courts clearly reached the
right decisions in all three cases: but we suggest that the implied term
approach would reinforce their reasoning and con ﬁne still further the
scope of common mistake in commercial law. If the implied term argument
is unorthodox we nevertheless suggest it has principle, clarity, economy
and commercial good sense to recommend it.
II. C
OMMON FAILURE (NO. 1):
TRIPLE SEVEN MSN 27251 L TD.VAZMAN AIRSERVICES LTD.
Common mistake failed in the ﬁrst recent case. Peter MacDonald Eggers Q.C.
(sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge) held the mistake not fundamental
enough (and that the express terms of the contract were inconsistent with
18Belize Telecom [2009] UKPC 10, [2009] 1 W.L.R. 1988, at [17].
19Cf.EIC Services Ltd. v Phipps [2003] EWHC 1507 (Ch), [2003] 1 W.L.R. 2360, at [178], per Neuberger
J. holding the “oﬃcious bystander ”test useful to demonstrate the uncommerciality of a common mistake
plea, notwithstanding rejection of the implied term approach in Great Peace [2002] EWCA Civ 1407,
[2003] Q.B. 679 (reversed on the facts: [2004] EWCA Civ 1069, [2005] 1 W.L.R. 1377).
20Philips Electronique Grand Public S.A. v British Sky Broadcasting Ltd. [1995] EMLR 472, 481, per
Bingham M.R.562 [2018] The Cambridge Law Journal
the plea).21The dispute concerned a ﬁve-year lease of two large passenger
jets from the claimant to the defendant. As was clear throughout the nego-
tiations, the defendant lessee intended to use the aircraft to ferry pilgrims
from West Africa to the Hajj in Mecca. To do so the defendant neededoﬃcial approval in both Nigeria and Saudi Arabia. When the aircraft
lease was signed on 20 June 2016, the Nigerian authorities had already
issued the necessary approval. It was expected that the Saudi GeneralAuthority of Civil Aviation would do the same. In fact on 15 June 2016
the Saudi authority had written to the defendant denying permission (citing
ﬁnancial and security concerns). This decision was received by the defen-
dants on 20 June 2016, but only after they had signed the lease. The defend-
ant tried to persuade the Saudi authority to change its decision; this was
unsuccessful. The defendant then refused to take delivery of the aircraft,and the claimant terminated the lease according to its terms and claimed
damages for breach. The defendant ’s plea was common mistake. It failed
(leaving it liable for some $22 m. damages, plus interest).
The Deputy Judge rejected the plea because the mistake was insu ﬃ-
ciently fundamental (i.e. the incorrect belief of both parties that the Saudi
authority had not refused permission). So the court ’s primary reasoning
addressed whether the mistake was serious enough to justify relief. No criti-
cism can be made of the judgment, for it is entirely consistent with prece-
dent. But as suggested, this orthodox inquiry leads the court into anill-deﬁned morass. It would be better not to require judges to venture there.
The learned judge accepted that “no precise test ”exists for a mistake ’s
fundamentality.
22He rejected some possible candidates. It was insu ﬃcient
that a mistake had induced entry into the contract –that is, that had the truth
been known, the parties would not have contracted.23That “causative ”
approach would greatly widen the scope of a plea which “necessarily
applies to a small number of cases ”; for as Steyn J. has said, the court ’s
ﬁrst imperative is to uphold bargains.24More controversially, the learned
Deputy Judge doubted the “impossibility ”test advanced in The Great
Peace . If taken literally it would provide an easy answer to Triple Seven
v Azman Air Services (where it remained perfectly possible for the aircraft
to be delivered and the rent paid); it would also suggest that Steyn J. ’s lead-
ing decision in Associated Japanese Bank was wrong (for it had been quite
possible for the bank to pay under the guarantee there, even though the
security for the transaction turned out not to exist). The judge also rejectedHenderson J. ’s suggested reformulation that what must be impossible is
“performance of the contract in accordance with the [parties ’] common
21[2018] EWHC 1348 (Comm) ( “Triple Seven ”).
22Ibid., at para. [70].
23Ibid., at paras. [70], [72].
24Ibid., at paras. [69] –[70].C.L.J. 563 Common Mistake in Contract
assumption ”.25In the end, all the court can do is to compare the actual state
of aﬀairs with what had been assumed by the parties, and ask whether the
diﬀerence is “suﬃciently fundamental or essential or radical ”–in Steyn J. ’s
words an “unexpected and wholly exceptional ”change.26
On the facts, the defendant submitted that the Saudi authority ’s refusal of
permission removed “the very purpose ”and a “vital attribute ”of the aircraft
leases, and the “commercial feasibility ”of their performance.27The learned
judge disagreed, holding that even if the purpose of taking pilgrims to the
Hajj in 2016 had been defeated, the leases ran for ﬁve years of which the
2016 Hajj was a relatively short proportion.28The leases as a whole had not
become “essentially and radically di ﬀerent ”. While the parties would not
have signed the contract had the truth been known, that was insu ﬃcient
for relief.
The decision seems (with respect) entirely correct. But the approach
raises di ﬃcult questions of degree. What if the leases had been for 12
months? Was counsel for the claimants correct to concede (with impunityonthese facts) that had the leases been for the 2016 Hajj only, the mistake
would have been su ﬃciently fundamental?
29
The implied term approach recommended above would apply as follows.
Was it implicit (an unspoken term) that if the parties ’factual assumptions
about Saudi authorisation were wrong, the contract would never come into
being? Posed thus the plea would be doomed to fail. The courts are prop-erly reluctant to accept that the parties were content to leave important mat-
ters tacit and unsaid in a lengthy, detailed contract expressly covering
numerous other matters. It is exceptionally di ﬃcult to establish a term by
necessary implication in such contracts. To revert to counsel ’s concession
inTriple Seven v Azman Air Services , would the hypothetical reasonable
parties have issued the testy “oh, of course ”to an o ﬃcious bystander seek-
ing to express something which (surely) went without saying?
30Arguably
not. A reasonable lessor might well have thought that the risk of permission
being refused (or having already been refused) was entirely the lessee ’s
aﬀair, and at its sole risk.
Previous courts have accepted this. Although not reasoned as an implied
terms case (but using the “doctrines ”of mistake and frustration),
Amalgamated Investment & Property Co. Ltd. v John Walker & Sons
Ltd.is directly analogous.31Unknown to either party to the sale of a build-
ing, the Secretary of State had decided to “List”it (as possessing special
25Ibid., at paras. [64] –[65] citing Apvodedo NV v Collins [2008] EWHC 775 (Ch), at [43].
26Ibid., at paras. [66], [69].
27Ibid., at para. [83](4).
28Ibid., at para. [89].
29Ibid., at para. [89](1).
30Shirlaw v Southern Foundries (1926) Ltd . [1939] 2 K.B. 206, 227, per Mackinnon L.J.; cf. EIC Services
Ltd.[2003] EWHC 1507 (Ch), [2003] 1 W.L.R. 2360.
31Amalgamated Investment & Property Co. Ltd. v John Walker & Sons Ltd. [1977] 1 W.L.R. 164.564 [2018] The Cambridge Law Journal
architectural merit). The formal “Listing ”order was issued just after the
contract was signed. The Court of Appeal held this was a change of circum-
stances postdating the contract. But there was no relief for the disappointed
purchaser (the building ’s value declined because it could no longer be rede-
veloped): the contract was not frustrated. For Buckley L.J. the risk of
“Listing ”was one that inhered in all property, and therefore a risk that
every party to transactions in land had to accept. Lawton L.J. reasoned like-wise, emphasising that the parties in casu were commercial organisations
well aware of this possibility. They took the risk of declining value not
only from physical causes ( “ﬁre and tempest ”) but also from government
intervention. This reasoning is equally compelling in Triple Seven v
Azman Air Services . Of course this seems hard on the lessee, but no harder
than the John Walker case. A deal can make perfect commercial sense des-
pite being tough for the losing party.
32
The Deputy Judge further held that the contract ’s terms excluded com-
mon mistake.33The aircraft lease allocated the risk of refused approval to
the defendant lessee. The contract expressly said that the lessee ’s obliga-
tions were “absolute and unconditional, irrespective of any contingency
or circumstance whatsoever ...[which] would or might otherwise have
the eﬀect of terminating or in any way a ﬀecting any obligation of Lessee
under this Agreement ”. Also, the defendant ’s failure to obtain any neces-
sary government permissions was de ﬁned as an “Event of Default ”.
Undoubtedly these provisions placed the risk of mistakes (or mispredic-
tions) about Saudi authorisation upon the defendant. No doubt the prudent
drafter would include such provisions to place the matter beyond doubt. Butthey were not strictly necessary to exclude common mistake, because it was
impossible to suggest that the lease contained an implied condition
precedent.
III. C
OMMON FAILURE (NO. 2): DANAGASP.J.S.C. VDANAGASSUKUK LTD.
In another recent case where common mistake was again unsuccessfully
pled, Leggatt J. (as he then was) took an approach closer to that advocated
here.34Leggatt J. did not consider the intractable question of “fundamental-
ity”because there was no “gap”in the contract through which common
mistake could come into play. Such contractual space or silence was, as
Steyn J. held in Associated Japanese Bank , an anterior question.35Only
if the contract does not deal with the matter in question is it proper to
32E.g.Aquila Wsa Aviation Oppurtunities II Ltd. v Onur Air Tasimacilik AS [2018] EWHC 519 (Comm),
at [66], per Cockerill J.
33Triple Seven , at [91].
34Dana Gas P.J.S.C. v Dana Gas Sukuk Ltd. [2017] EWHC 2928 (Comm), [2018] 1 Lloyd ’s Rep. 177
(“Dana Gas ”).
35[1989] 1 W.L.R. 255, 268 (see also Great Peace [2002] EWCA Civ 1407, [2003] Q.B. 679, at [75]).C.L.J. 565 Common Mistake in Contract
turn to common mistake. On the facts of Dana Gas , Leggatt J. held that the
contract was deliberately structured to create a payment obligation which
wasnotcontingent on the existence of a certain fact.
The validity of a Purchase Undertaking deed governed by English law
was in question. The ﬁnancial product being purchased was supposed to
be Shari ’a compliant (under the law of the United Arab Emirates which
governed the product). The preliminary issue was whether, assuming (with-out deciding) that the product violated Shari ’a and therefore U.A.E. law, the
Purchase Undertaking was void for common mistake in English law.
Leggatt J. held not. Payment of the “exercise price ”under the deed was
a distinct obligation, clearly separated from and prior to any “sale agree-
ment ”of the underlying product. Leggatt J. held that this structure was
no accident but deliberately included, precisely to insulate the purchaser ’s
obligation to pay from “the risk that ...the transaction documents governed
by U.A.E. law will turn out to be invalid ”.
36
On those facts, it is evident that no “gap”existed and common mistake
became a hopeless plea.37But the case should not be taken to suggest that
clever drafting is needed to plug possible gaps and thereby preclude pleas
of mistake. As Leggatt J. stated, common mistake “seldom succeeds ”pre-
cisely because such gaps are unusual –“the risk of a mistake is usually allo-
cated by the contract to one of the parties ”.38We would put it even more
strongly than did his Lordship. The contract always allocates the risk.
Silence is not a “gap”waiting to be ﬁlled. Silence is a positive abdication
entailing that the loss lies where it falls. This follows from the quite gener-
ally applicable rules on implication of terms –that is, the reason why courts
will not usually ﬁnd an unspoken term with such far-reaching e ﬀects on the
contract ’s validity. The starting point, and nearly always the ﬁnish point, is
an inference that if the parties did not say anything on the matter, the inten-tion was that nothing (legally) is to happen if it occurs. This does not
depend on special rules relating to particular areas, as Leggatt J. could per-
haps be taken to suggest with his reference to caveat emptor in the law of
sales.
39The point is quite general.
The “gap”is not just an anterior question, but the only one. Let us leave
aside contracts which expressly provide for voidness in the event of a mis-take –or more likely positively require that mistakes are notto avoid the
contract (as in both Triple Seven andDana Gas ). How is contractual silence
to be approached? Nearly always, such silence must be understood as thecontractual allocation of risk to whichever party loses from the mistake
36Dana Gas , at [54].
37Ibid., at paras. [57] –[78].
38Ibid., at para. [64].
39Ibid. (N.B. Leggatt J. was discussing Lord Atkin ’s example of sale of a supposed “old master painting ”:
Bell v Lever Bros [1932] A.C. 161, 224). See further William Sindall plc. v Cambridgeshire County
Council [1994] 1 W.L.R. 1016, 1035, per Ho ﬀmann L.J.566 [2018] The Cambridge Law Journal
of fact. (With “old master paintings ”the loser could be the buyer, if the
painting is actually a copy, or equally the seller, if what turns out to be a
priceless “undoubted Raphael ”had been sold as a “Gerard Dow ”or
“Zoﬀany”.) Silence means the loss lies where it falls –in a mistake case,
that the contract remains in force. There is no room for a gap of any
kind. The only alternatives are (as stated) that nothing is to happen or,
exceptionally, that the court implies a term (condition precedent) avoidingthe contract for mistake. Unless such a condition precedent is implicit, the
“gap closing ”inference of non-intervention is inevitable, and the plea of
mistake must fail.
This approach would provide an even shorter answer to the cases dis-
cussed. In neither Triple Seven norDana Gas is it plausible that avoiding
the contract must have been intended by the parties, but was left unsaid. Ina commercial contract such drastic consequences of factual mistakes would
surely be spelled out, and not left implicit. The express contract terms for-
tify that conclusion. But even in the absence of those provisions, commonmistake would still have failed.
IV. U
NCOMMON SUCCESS :BRITISH REDCROSS V WERRY
In suitably rare situations, a common mistake plea can still succeed –as in
our third case.40This raised the status of an agreement compromising liti-
gation under the Inheritance (Provision for Family and Dependants) Act
1975. The claimant was the unmarried partner of an intestate individual,who was (since unmarried) not a bene ﬁciary under the intestacy rules,
and the defendants were the bene ﬁciaries under the intestacy. The defend-
ant bene ﬁciaries agreed in 2011 to transfer certain interests in land to the
claimant partner, for whom proper provision had not been made.
Subsequently, to general surprise, the will of the supposedly “intestate indi-
vidual ”turned up during a house clearance. It left all the testator ’s property
to the claimant absolutely. In a very brief judgment, Judge Elizabeth Cooke
held it was “beyond dispute ”that the 2011 agreement was void for common
mistake; compromising intestacy litigation when the “intestate ”individual
had in fact left a will involved a mistake “as fundamental as that referred
to by Lord Atkin in Bell v Lever Bros [1932] A.C. 161, where a party con-
tracted to purchase land that he or she already owned ”.
41
This will become a textbook example of a “suﬃciently fundamental mis-
take ”, which is how the learned judge reasoned. But it is also exempli ﬁes
the situation when the parties must implicitly have intended that in the
event of a will being found, the compromise agreement would be void.
Had the “oﬃcious bystander ”spoken up to this e ﬀect in 2011, he would
40British Red Cross v Werry [2017] EWHC 875 (Ch).
41Ibid., at paras. [21] –[22].C.L.J. 567 Common Mistake in Contract
have been speedily silenced. Here it really did go without saying that the
compromise of claims against the deceased ’s intestate bene ﬁciaries
depended on there being an intestacy (without which they would not in
fact be “intestate bene ﬁciaries ”and the distribution of assets challenged
by the claim would not in fact occur). The existence of intestacy was neces-
sarily the basis for the compromise agreement. It falls into the rare category
of matters so obvious that they would (understandably) not be spelled out.
V. C ONCLUSION :FAREWELL TO THE “DOCTRINE OF COMMON MISTAKE ”
Our modest proposal is that there is no “doctrine of common mistake ”.
Slade was right.42Only when a contract makes the mistaken fact a condi-
tion precedent for binding obligation is the court permitted to “avoid ”the
supposed contract. Only rarely will such a condition precedent be implicit
although unsaid. Rarer still in “bigﬁsh”commercial cases, where parties
can be expected to spell out such important matters and not leave them
unspoken ( “going without saying ”). This demanding test for implication
can be met, as British Red Cross v Werry shows (signi ﬁcantly this case
did not involve sophisticated commercial parties).43But if the contract con-
tains no condition precedent, express or implied, the contract continues to
bind according to its terms . It would violate those terms to avoid the con-
tract: there is no room for a “doctrine of common mistake ”.44
Even if the “doctrine of frustration ”is based on the need to make an
exception in the interests of justice –a commercially questionable assertion
despite its high authority45–that dispensing power must not be imported
into cases of mistake. In The Great Peace , Lord Phillips M.R. approached
frustration and common mistake as closely related doctrines; the facts ofAmalgamated Investments v John Walker , discussed above, show why it is
desirable to align the tests for unexpected events whether preceding or suc-
ceeding the contract. Thus, if the argument here is correct it suggests that
there is no “doctrine ”of frustration either.
46That conclusion would return
frustration to its implied term roots.47But this is a subject for another day.
As suggested, the implied term approach (really the “implicit meaning ”
approach) is entailed by respect for the bargain struck by the contracting
parties. It also avoids the need to distinguish degrees of fundamentalityof mistake, when these shade imperceptibly into each other. That orthodox
42C.J. Slade, “The Myth of Mistake in the English Law of Contract ”(1954) 70 L.Q.R. 385.
43Cf. Cartwright, “The Rise and Fall of Mistake ”(noting the commercial context for the con ﬁnement of
common mistake, and wondering whether it could ever enjoy a renaissance in non-commercial cases).
44For unconscionable mistakes cf. n.10 above.
45E.g.Hirji Mulji v Cheong Yue Steamship Co. Ltd . [1926] A.C. 497, 510, per Lord Sumner; J. Lauritzen
AS v Wijsmuller B.V. (The Super Servant Two) [1990] 1 Lloyd ’s Rep. 1, 8, per Bingham L.J.
46J.C. Smith, “Contracts –Mistake, Frustration and Implied Terms ”(1994) 110 L.Q.R. 400.
47Taylor v Caldwell (1863) 3 B. & S. 826. For a very similar approach to mistake, see Pope v Buenos Ayres
New Gas Co. (1892) 8 T.L.R. 758, 759, per Lindley L.J.; Solle [1950] 1 K.B. 671.568 [2018] The Cambridge Law Journal
test is bound to vex the courts and wrong-foot those trying to predict their
decisions –that is, the very unpredictability of the test invites litigation.
Given the congruity of the implicit meaning approach with the three recent
decisions analysed here, we also suggest it reaches sensible results.
It is preferable to another approach suggested by Andrew Tettenborn: a
doctrine with initially permissive withdrawal for mistake (i.e. for all sign-
iﬁcant mistakes), but denying relief once the contract is performed (in
whole or in part).48Professor Tettenborn argues that this strikes the right
balance, being fair to the mistaken losing party but not requiring the com-
plicated “unscrambling ”of executed contracts. But is the balance correctly
struck? In Dana Gas , none of the obligations under the (English law)
Purchase Undertaking had yet been performed: performance of the ﬁrst
stage of that transaction (i.e. payment) was resisted. If the Tettenbornapproach would allow withdrawal from that transaction because it remained
“executory ”, it permits parties to escape the consequences of their mistakes
too readily, with insu ﬃcient weight on the commercial importance of
upholding even executory contracts. Conversely, would the Tettenborn
doctrine deny avoidance of the compromise agreement in British Red
Cross v Werry because steps had been taken to implement it? That
would be inconsistent with the agreement ’s true (implicit) meaning.
Professor Tettenborn ’s approach is a refreshing attempt to reconceptua-
lise common mistake. In the end it is misconceived, in common withnearly all writing on the subject, because it assumes that there isa“doctrine
of common mistake ”. There is not. The only question is the meaning of the
contract. As Slade wrote many years ago, it is unfortunate that Lord Atkinattempted to ﬂesh out this simple point, since confusion has resulted.
49Bell
v Lever Bros ’s authority has since su ﬀered grievous harm: Catharine
MacMillan excoriates the uneasy incorporation of half-digested ideas of(subjective) “will theory ”inBell ’sfamous (and di ﬃcult) speeches.
50
Alas, Professor MacMillan ’s book was published after Bell ’sdeﬁnitive sta-
tus was rea ﬃrmed in The Great Peace . It is scarcely likely that the Supreme
Court will reappraise this area of law in the near future. When the oppor-
tunity ﬁnally comes, the unhappy “doctrine ”of common mistake should
receive its quietus. Until then, courts should adopt this article ’s approach
(which is substantially the reasoning of Leggatt J. in the Dana Gas
case),51which leaves no room for a “doctrine ”of common mistake.
48A. Tettenborn, “Agreements, Common Mistake and the Purpose of Contract ”(2011) 27 J.C.L. 91.
49(1954) 70 L.Q.R. 385, 401. See also Cartwright, “The Rise and Fall of Mistake ”.
50C. MacMillan, Mistakes in Contract Law (Hart 2010).
51See further Pope (1892) 8 T.L.R. 758.C.L.J. 569 Common Mistake in Contract
Copyright © Cambridge Law Journal and Contributors
2018 
