1 
 UNIVERSITY OF HONG KONG 
FACULTY OF LAW 
 
JDOC 1002   LAW OF CONTRACT II 
 
SEMINAR QUESTIONS : MISTAKE  
 
 
Question 1  
 
Fox is a private dealer in antique silverware. He does not have a physical shop but 
advertises his services through his Instagram account.  
In September 202 3, Tom contacted Fox, seeking to sell to Fox a silver cream jug in the 
shape of a cow. Tom had stumbled upon  the cow creamer  while cleaning out his attic  and 
hoped to sell it for a good price. Fox said: “Leave the item and your contact information 
behind and I will have it examined .” Tom handed the cow creamer  to Fox and went home .  
When Tom asked Fox for a quote the following week , Fox said to Tom: “I’ve taken a look  
at your item . It is of modern Dutch manufacture  and not worth very much . I can offer  you 
$120 for it.” Tom agreed and sold the cow creamer to Fox at that price.  
One day, Fox decided to give the cow creamer a polis h. While rubbing the silver, he 
discovered a hallmark on the bottom of the cow creamer indicating it was from the 18th 
century and very rare. Fox immediately advertised it for sale  for $6000 on Instagram .  
A few days later , Tom saw Fox’s advertisement of the cow creamer on Instagram. When 
he saw the price , he was furious . He immediately contacted Fox demanding to get his cow 
creamer back. “You tricked me!” he berated  Fox. “Give me my cow creamer back!”  
Fox replied: “I genuinely  thought it was modern Dutch . Besides, a deal’s a deal. And I 
have already sold the cow creamer to Watkyns. ”  
Watkyns was Tom’s neighbor. Tom went to see Watkyns, told him what happened and 
demanded return of the cow creamer. Watkyns refused.  
 
Advise Tom  as to whether there is any basis for him to recover the cow creamer from 
Watkyns  under the doctrine of mistake .  
 
 
 
 
2 
 Question 2 
 
Please read the article  J Morgan , “Common Mistake in Contract : Rare Success and 
Common Misapprehensions ” (201 8) 77 CLJ 559. Then answer the following questions.  
 
(a) According to Morgan , how should common mistake cases be decided ?  
(b) How is Morgan’s approach different to the approach under the established case 
law?  
(c) Do you find Morgan ’s proposal  for resolving cases of common mistake  attractive ?  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
