18
Duress
Central Issues
A contract can be set aside on the ground that it has been entered into
under duress. Duress can take different forms. The principal forms are
duress of the person, duress of goods, and economic duress.
Outside the category of duress to the person, the law has been slow to
develop. It was not until 1976 that the courts first recognized the
existence of economic duress. A consequence of the late development
of economic duress is that a number of questions remain unanswered
in relation to the scope of the doctrine. There appear to be three
central elements, namely (i) illegitimate pressure applied by one party
which (ii) constitutes a (significant) cause inducing the other party to
enter into the contract and (iii) leaves the claimant with no reasonable
alternative but to give in to the pressure.
It is generally agreed that ‘illegitimate pressure’ includes a threat to
commit a crime and a threat to commit a tort. It is also agreed that a
threatened breach of contract can constitute illegitimate pressure but
it is not yet clear whether all threatened breaches of contract are
illegitimate for this purpose. Particularly difficult is the case where the
threat is made in the bona fide belief that what has been threatened is
not a breach of contract but it subsequently transpires that that belief
is mistaken and that what has been threatened is, in fact, a breach of
contract. A further difficulty arises where the pressure applied by the
defendant is lawful. The Supreme Court has confirmed that a doctrine
of lawful act duress does exist in English law, albeit if operates within
very narrow (and contested) limits. The definition of ‘illegitimacy’ is
one of the major issues in this chapter.
The test to be applied to determine whether there is a sufficient causal
link between the illegitimate pressure and the entry by the claimant
5.
into the contract may depend upon the form that the duress assumes.
Where it takes the form of duress of the person it would appear
sufficient that the illegitimate pressure was ‘a’ cause of the claimant’s
decision to enter into the contract, whereas in the case of economic
duress it would appear that the illegitimate pressure must have been a
‘significant’ cause of the decision to enter into the contract. If this is
so, why should the law distinguish between duress of the person and
economic duress in this way?
Other factors taken into account by the courts when deciding whether
or not economic duress has been established on the facts of a case
include whether the victim had any realistic practical alternative but to
submit to the pressure, whether the victim protested at the time, and
whether he affirmed the contract at a time when the victim was free of
the pressure that had been applied by the defendant. These factors
would seem to be relevant to the question of whether or not there is a
sufficient causal link between the illegitimate pressure and the
decision of the claimant to enter into the contract but the courts
appear to regard them as distinct, free-standing elements which must
be taken into account. While the existence of duress must ultimately
depend upon a careful evaluation of the facts and circumstances of
the case, the danger with a multi-factor approach is a lack of
consistency as different courts place different emphasis on the
different factors.
18.1
 
Introduction
Duress of the person is well established in the authorities. By contrast, duress of goods
and economic duress have had a more uncertain career. Duress of goods was stunted for
many years by the decision in 
Skeate
 
v. 
Beale
 
(1841) 11 Ad & E 983, in which it was held
that the unlawful detention of goods belonging to another did not constitute duress.
Economic duress (that is to say a case in which one party uses his superior economic
power in an illegitimate manner in order to compel the other party to agree to enter into
a contract or to enter the contract on particular terms) was not formally recognized until
the decision of Kerr J in 
Occidental Worldwide Investment Corporation
 
v. 
Skibs A/S
Avanti (The Siboen and The Sibotre)
 
[1976] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 293.
The late recognition of economic duress and the problems posed for the development of
a coherent doctrine of duress of goods by 
Skeate
 
v. 
Beale
 
meant that judges who wished
to avoid giving effect to an agreement that had been procured by the application of
illegitimate pressure had to find other doctrinal pegs on which to hang their decision. A
classic example of this phenomenon is said to be the decision of Lord Ellenborough in
Stilk
 
v. 
Myrick
 
(1809) 2 Camp 317, 6 Esp 129 (discussed in more detail at 
5.2.2.3.1
). The
argument which is advanced by some authors and judges is that, in the absence of a
developed doctrine of duress, Lord Ellenborough had to make use of the doctrine of
consideration in order to find that the plaintiff was not entitled to recover the promised
extra pay. The obvious difficulty with this argument is that there was little evidence of
duress on the facts of 
Stilk
, given that the vessel was in port at the time at which the
master promised to share the wages of the deserters with the remainder of the crew
provided that they worked the ship back to London. However, leaving these factual
difficulties to one side, it is clear that the modern trend is to regard duress as the more
appropriate regulator of contract modifications (see 
United States
 
v. 
Stump Homes
Specialties Manufacturing Inc
 
905 F 2d 1117 (1990), 
5.2.2.3.2.3
 
and 
The Alev
 
[1989] 1
Lloyd’s Rep 138, 147, 
5.2.2.3.2.3
). The desirability of this development is open to
question (
5.2.2.3.2.3
) but there can be little doubt that it is taking place. As a result
duress is likely to play a greater role in the modern case-law, yet judges will find that it
does not provide ready-made answers to the questions that are asked of them. The
consequence will be a degree of uncertainty in the case-law until the doctrine settles
down and its limits are established.
That said, the essential elements of duress do now appear to be firmly established, albeit
significant issues remain to be resolved in relation to some aspects of these elements.
The most recent authoritative exposition of the elements of duress was provided by Lord
Burrows in 
Pakistan International Airline Corporation
 
v. 
Times Travel (UK) Ltd
 
[2021]
UKSC 40, [2021] 3 WLR 727 as follows:
78. Where it is alleged that one contracting party (the defendant) has induced the other contracting party (the
claimant) to enter into the contract between them by duress, the case law has laid down that there are two
essential elements that a claimant needs to establish in order to succeed in a claim for rescission of the contract.
The first is a threat (or pressure exerted) by the defendant that is illegitimate. The second is that that
illegitimate threat (or pressure) caused the claimant to enter into the contract. As Lord Goff said, in the context
of economic duress, in 
Dimskal Shipping Co SA
 
v. 
International Transport Workers’ Federation (The Evia
Luck) (No 2)
 
[1992] 2 AC 152, 165:
‘[I]t is now accepted that economic pressure may be sufficient to amount to duress [which would entitle a
party to avoid a contract] provided at least that the economic pressure may be characterised as
illegitimate and has constituted a significant cause inducing the plaintiff to enter into the relevant
contract … ’
79. It is also important that, in the context of economic duress (but the position appears to be different in
respect of other forms of duress: see 
Astley
 
v. 
Reynolds
 
(1731) 2 Strange 916), there is a third element. This is
that the claimant must have had no reasonable alternative to giving in to the threat (or pressure): see, for
example, Dyson J in 
DSND Subsea Ltd (formerly DSND Oceantech Ltd)
 
v. 
Petroleum Geo-Services ASA
 
[2000]
BLR 530, para 131; 
Borrelli
 
v. 
Ting
 
[2010] UKPC 21; [2010] Bus LR 1718, para 35.
The principal issues in this definition that remain to be resolved relate to the exact
meaning of ‘illegitimate’ and the precise nature of the causal link that must be
established between the threat or pressure and the decision of the claimant to enter into
the contract. Both of these issues will be examined during the course of this chapter.
There is one further basis for duress which should be mentioned, only to be dismissed,
and that is the unfairness of the terms of the contract (commonly referred to as
‘substantive unfairness’, on which see 
20.1
). While substantive unfairness is a common
feature of duress cases, it does not constitute the foundation of the doctrine. The reason
for this is that the presence of substantive unfairness is not, of itself, sufficient to
constitute duress, nor is its absence sufficient to negative the existence of duress. For
example, if I am compelled by circumstances to sell my house quickly and forced to
lower the price, the unfairness of the price will not of itself suffice to demonstrate the
existence of duress. On the other hand, if a robber forces me at gunpoint to sell my
house for a fair price, the fairness of the price will not prevent me from setting aside the
contract on the ground of duress. What is wrong with the contract is not the fairness or
the unfairness of the terms of the contract, but the nature of the threats that have been
used in order to induce me to enter into it. In other words duress is an example of
‘procedural unfairness’ (on which see 
20.1
). It is therefore suggested that the basis of the
doctrine is correctly located in the lack of consent on the part of the person seeking to
set aside the contract and the wrongful or illegitimate nature of the threats made by the
other party in order to induce entry into the contract. These twin elements are to be
found in all cases of duress, namely duress of the person, duress of goods, and economic
duress.
18.2
 
Duress of the Person
Duress of the person is a well-recognized form of duress and its operation is illustrated
by the following case:
BARTON V. ARMSTRONG
[1976] AC 104, Privy Council
Armstrong and Barton were the major shareholders in a company, Landmark
Corporation Ltd, which was involved in the development of a building estate which
was to be known as ‘Paradise Waters’. Armstrong was the chairman and Barton
was the managing director. They were locked in a power struggle for control of the
company which, over the years, became increasingly bitter. Barton initially
succeeded in obtaining the removal of Armstrong as chairman of the company, and
then negotiations began as to the terms on which Armstrong’s interest was to be
bought out. Armstrong demanded that Landmark repay to him a loan of $400,000
which was stated to be payable forthwith in the event of Armstrong being removed
from the chairmanship of Landmark. Barton hoped to be able to pay off Armstrong
by negotiating a loan from United Dominions Corporation (Australia) Ltd (‘UDC’)
but UDC, despite initial appearances to the contrary, refused to provide the loan. In
these circumstances Barton entered into negotiations with a representative of
Armstrong, and these negotiations resulted in a deed of 17 January 1967 under
which Barton agreed, inter alia, to repay the loan of $400,000, to pay Armstrong
$140,000, and to buy his shares for $180,000. An order for the winding up of
Landmark was made on 11 January 1968 but on 10 January Barton commenced a
suit in equity in which he alleged that he had been coerced by Armstrong into
agreeing to the terms of the deed by threats that he would be murdered and by the
exertion of other unlawful pressure over him. He therefore sought a declaration
that the deed was ‘void’ so far as it concerned him. The trial judge, Street J, found
that Armstrong had indeed threatened Barton and his family, but held that Barton’s
primary and predominant reason for entering into the transaction was a
commercial one, namely to ensure the survival of the company by ridding it of
Armstrong. The Court of Appeal of New South Wales dismissed Barton’s appeal.
Barton appealed to the Privy Council who, by a majority (Lord Wilberforce and
Lord Simon of Glaisdale dissenting), allowed the appeal on the ground that
Armstrong’s threats were a reason for Barton entering into the agreement and that
he was entitled to relief even though he might well have entered into the contract
had Armstrong not threatened him in the way in which he had done. The deeds in
question were therefore declared to be void so far as they concerned Barton.
Lord Cross of Chelsea
[delivering the judgment of the majority of their Lordships]
Their Lordships turn now to consider the question of law which provoked a
difference of opinion in the Court of Appeal Division. It is hardly surprising that
there is no direct authority on the point, for if A threatens B with death if he does
not execute some document and B, who takes A’s threats seriously, executes the
document it can be only in the most unusual circumstances that there can be any
doubt whether the threats operated to induce him to execute the document. But
this is a most unusual case and the findings of fact made below do undoubtedly
raise the question whether it was necessary for Barton in order to obtain 
relief to
establish that he would not have executed the deed in question but for the threats
… There is an obvious analogy between setting aside a disposition for duress or
undue influence and setting it aside for fraud. In each case—to quote the words of
Holmes J in 
Fairbanks
 
v. 
Snow
 
(1887) 13 NE 596, 598—‘the party has been
subjected to an improper motive for action’ … Had Armstrong made a fraudulent
misrepresentation to Barton for the purpose of inducing him to execute the deed of
January 17, 1967, the answer to the problem which has arisen would have been
clear. If it were established that Barton did not allow the representation to affect his
judgment then he could not make it a ground for relief even though the
representation was designed and known by Barton to be designed to affect his
judgment. If on the other hand Barton relied on the misrepresentation Armstrong
could not have defeated his claim to relief by showing that there were other more
weighty causes which contributed to his decision to execute the deed, for in this
field the court does not allow an examination into the relative importance of
contributory causes … Their Lordships think that the same rule should apply in
cases of duress and that if Armstrong’s threats were ‘a’ reason for Barton’s
executing the deed he is entitled to relief even though he might well have entered
into the contract if Armstrong had uttered no threats to induce him to do so.
It remains to apply the law to the facts … If Barton had to establish that he
would not have made the agreement but for Armstrong’s threats, then their
Lordships would not dissent from the view that he had not made out his case. But
no such onus lay on him. On the contrary it was for Armstrong to establish, if he
could, that the threats which he was making and the unlawful pressure which he
was exerting for the purpose of inducing Barton to sign the agreement and which
Barton knew were being made and exerted for this purpose in fact contributed
nothing to Barton’s decision to sign. The judge has found that during the 10 days
or so before the documents were executed Barton was in genuine fear that
Armstrong was planning to have him killed if the agreement was not signed. His
state of mind was described by the judge as one of ‘very real mental torment’ and
he believed that his fears would be at an end when once the documents were
executed. It is true that the judge was not satisfied that Vojinovic [who was alleged
by Barton to have been hired by Armstrong to kill him] had been employed by
Armstrong but if one man threatens another with unpleasant consequences if he
does not act in a particular way, he must take the risk that the impact of his threats
may be accentuated by extraneous circumstances for which he is not in fact
responsible. It is true that on the facts as their Lordships assume them to have
been Armstrong’s threats may have been unnecessary; but it would be unrealistic
to hold that they played no part in making Barton decide to execute the
documents. The proper inference to be drawn from the facts found is, their
Lordships think, that though it may be that Barton would have executed the
documents even if Armstrong had made no threats and exerted no unlawful
pressure to induce him to do so the threats and unlawful pressure in fact
contributed to his decision to sign the documents and to recommend their
execution by Landmark and the other parties to them. It may be, of course, that
Barton’s fear of Armstrong had evaporated before he issued his writ in this action
but Armstrong—understandably enough—expressly disclaimed reliance on the
defence of delay on Barton’s part in repudiating the deed.
In the result therefore the appeal should be allowed and a declaration made
that the deeds in question were executed by Barton under duress and are void so
far as concerns him.
…
Lord Wilberforce and Lord Simon of Glaisdale
[dissenting]
The reason why we do not agree with the majority decision is, briefly, that we
regard the issues in this case as essentially issues of fact, issues moreover of a
character particularly 
within the sphere of the trial judge bearing, as they do, upon
motivation and credibility. On all important issues, clear findings have been made
by Street J and concurred in by the Court of Appeal—either unanimously or by
majority. Accepted rules of practice and, such rules apart, sound principle should,
in our opinion, prevent a second court of appeal from reviewing them in the
absence of some miscarriage of justice, or some manifest and important error of
law or misdirection. In our view no such circumstance exists in this case. Before
stating those findings of fact, which are to our mind conclusive, we think it
desirable to define in our own way the legal basis on which they rest.
The action is one to set aside an apparently complete and valid agreement on
the ground of duress. The basis of the plaintiff’s claim is, thus, that though there
was apparent consent there was no true consent to the agreement: that the
agreement was not voluntary.
This involves consideration of what the law regards as voluntary, or its
opposite; for in life, including the life of commerce and finance, many acts are done
under pressure, sometimes overwhelming pressure, so that one can say that the
actor had no choice but to act. Absence of choice in this sense does not negate
consent in law: for this the pressure must be one of a kind which the law does not
regard as legitimate. Thus, out of the various means by which consent may be
obtained—advice, persuasion, influence, inducement, representation, commercial
pressure—the law has come to select some which it will not accept as a reason for
voluntary action: fraud, abuse of relation of confidence, undue influence, duress or
coercion. In this the law, under the influence of equity, has developed from the old
common law conception of duress—threat to life and limb—and it has arrived at
the modern generalisation expressed by Holmes J—‘subjected to an improper
motive for action’: 
Fairbanks
 
v. 
Snow
, 13 NE Reporter 596, 598.
In an action such as the present, then, the first step required of the plaintiff is to
show that some illegitimate means of persuasion was used. That there were
threats to Barton’s life was found by the judge …
The next necessary step would be to establish the relationship between the
illegitimate means used and the action taken. For the purposes of the present case
(reserving our opinion as to cases which may arise in other contexts) we are
prepared to accept, as the formula most favourable to the appellant, the test
proposed by the majority, namely, that the illegitimate means used was a reason
(not the reason, nor the predominant reason, nor the clinching reason) why the
complainant acted as he did. We are also prepared to accept that a decisive
answer is not obtainable by asking the question whether the contract would have
been made even if there had been no threats because, even if the answer to this
question is affirmative, that does not prove that the contract was not made
because of the threats.
Assuming therefore that what has to be decided is whether the illegitimate
means used was a reason why the complainant acted as he did, it follows that his
reason for acting must (unless the case is one of automatism which this is not) be
a conscious reason so that the complainant can give evidence of it: ‘I acted
because I was forced’. If his evidence is honest and accepted, that will normally
conclude the issue. If, moreover, he gives evidence, it is necessary for the court to
evaluate his evidence by testing it against his credibility and his actions.
In this case Barton gave evidence—his was, for practical purposes, the only
evidence supporting his case. The judge rejected it in important respects and
accepted it in others. The issues as to Barton’s motivations were issues purely of
fact … the findings as to motivation were largely, if not entirely, findings as to
credibility. It would be difficult to find matters more peculiarly than these within the
field of the trial judge who saw both contestants in the box, and who dealt carefully
and at length with the credibility, or lack of credibility, of each of them …
In our opinion the case is far from being one in which a second appellate court
should reverse findings made below and endorsed by a Court of Appeal. Respect
for such findings—particularly where the issues depend so much upon credibility
and an estimate of rival personalities—appears to us to be a central pillar of the
appellate process. It is perhaps otiose, but also fair to the judges below, to say that
we have no ground for thinking that the factual conclusions which they reached
after so prolonged a search did not represent the truth of the situation—or at least
the nearest approximation to truth that was attainable.
We would dismiss the appeal.
Commentary
The primary significance of 
Barton
 
lies in the test applied by the court to determine
whether there was a sufficient causal link between the pressure applied by Armstrong
and Barton’s decision to enter into the agreement on the terms on which he did. It was
held that it sufficed for Barton to prove that the threats were ‘a’ reason which induced
him to execute the deed. The threats did not have to be ‘the’ reason, the ‘predominant’
reason, or the ‘clinching’ reason. This is a very low threshold for a claimant to overcome.
The analogy that was drawn by Lord Cross was with cases of fraudulent
misrepresentation where a similar test is employed. The appropriateness of the analogy
may be doubted. Fraud is a serious matter which must be clearly and distinctly proved
(see 
Derry
 
v. 
Peek
 
(1889) 14 App Cas 337, 
17.5.3
). Duress, on the other hand, has
different shades of wrongdoing. The degree of turpitude in cases of economic duress
may be very much less than the threats to kill that were uttered in 
Barton
. It is therefore
not surprising to find that in cases of economic duress there is authority which supports
the existence of a more exacting causal requirement, namely that the threat must have
been a ‘significant’ cause of the claimant’s decision to enter into the contract (on which
see further 
18.4.1
).
The second point that is worth noting is that the Privy Council was content to accept the
submission of counsel for Barton that the effect of duress was to render the deed ‘void’
as far as he was concerned. This is contrary to the generally accepted view which is that
the effect of duress is to render the contract voidable (that is to say it remains valid until
it has been set aside). It is not clear why the Privy Council acceded to the submission
that duress rendered the deed ‘void’. It may be that the point was never argued and that
the assumption made that the deed was void was simply incorrect (it is certainly very
difficult to reconcile with subsequent authority). There is, however, another possible
view. It depends upon the conceptual foundation of duress. If it is the case that duress
can rest on the absence of consent on the part of the party seeking to set aside the
contract (or, as the case may be, the deed) then it becomes more plausible to argue that
absence of consent can render a contract void. The difficulty with this argument is that
in cases such as 
Universe Tankships of Monrovia
 
v. 
International Transport Workers’
Federation (The Universe Sentinel)
 
[1983] 1 AC 366 and 
Dimskal Shipping Co SA
 
v.
International Transport Workers’ Federation (The Evia Luck)
 
[1992] 2 AC 152 the
House of Lords implicitly rejected the proposition that there is an absence of consent in
duress cases. This being the case, duress renders a contract voidable rather than void.
The final point to note regarding 
Barton
 
relates to the illegitimacy of the pressure
exerted by Armstrong. It was not necessary for their Lordships to consider the meaning
of ‘illegitimacy’ given that a threat to kill someone is self-evidently illegitimate. A claim
of duress of the person must be founded on a threat to the physical health or well-being
of the claimant or a member of his or her family (and physical well-being should extend
to threats 
of imprisonment). If, however, the threat is one that relates to the economic
well-being of the claimant, such as a threat of financial ruin, it is not a case of duress of
the person but of economic duress (
Holyoake
 
v. 
Candy
 
[2017] EWHC 3397 (Ch), [233]).
Given that the causal link required for duress of the person appears to be lower than that
applicable to claims of economic duress (see earlier), the classification of the claim as
either a case of duress of the person or economic duress may be a matter of some
practical significance.
18.3
 
Duress of Goods
The law relating to duress of goods has struggled for recognition. For many years, the
courts held that the unlawful detention of another’s goods did not constitute duress. The
principal authority for this proposition was:
SKEATE V. BEALE
(1841) 11 Ad & E 983, Court of King’s Bench
The plaintiff distrained for arrears of rent, claiming that £19 10s was due from the
defendant. The defendant agreed that, if the distress was withdrawn, he would pay
£3 7s immediately and the outstanding £16 2s 6d within a month. He failed to pay
the sum so promised and the plaintiff sued to recover the outstanding amount. The
defendant argued that the seizure had been wrongful as the only sum due was £3
7s 6d and that he entered into the agreement only to prevent the plaintiff from
carrying out his threat to sell the goods. It was held that the defendant was not
entitled to set aside the transaction and that the plaintiff was entitled to judgment
for the sum claimed.
Lord Denman CJ
[delivering the judgment of the court]
We consider the law to be clear, and founded on good reason, that an
agreement is not void because made under duress of goods. There is no
distinction in this respect between a deed and an agreement not under seal; and,
with regard to the former, the law is laid down … and the distinction pointed out
between duress of, or menace to, the person, and duress of goods. The former is a
constraining force, which not only takes away the free agency, but may leave no
room for appeal to the law for a remedy: a man, therefore, is not bound by the
agreement which he enters into under such circumstances: but the fear that goods
may be taken or injured does not deprive any one of his free agency who
possesses that ordinary degree of firmness which the law requires all to exert. It is
not necessary now to enter into the consideration of cases in which it has been
held that money paid to redeem goods wrongfully seized, or to prevent their
wrongful seizure, may be recovered back in an action for money had and received:
for the distinction between those cases and the present, which must be taken to be
that of an agreement, not compulsorily but voluntarily entered into, is obvious.
Lindon
 
v. 
Hooper
 
(1 Cowp 414), and 
Knibbs
 
v. 
Hall
 
(1 Esp 84), are, however,
authorities to shew that, even if the money had been paid in this case, instead of
the agreement to pay it entered into, no action for money had and received could
have been sustained by the now defendant. For, although there is a difference in
the circumstances, and, the distress having 
been made, and some rent admitted to
be in arrear, no replevin could have been successfully made, yet if the plaintiff
distrained goods of the value of 20l. when little more than 3l. were due, there is no
doubt that, on payment of the value of the goods, or the sum claimed, an action
would have lain for the excessive distress. And it is of great importance that parties
should be holden to those remedies for injuries which the law prescribes, rather
than allowed to enter into agreements with a view to prevent them, intending at the
time not to keep their contracts. In the argument for the defendant, reliance was
placed on the facts that the agreement was entered into under protest, and that the
plaintiff must have known that only the smaller amount of rent was due. It is
unnecessary to consider what the effect of these would have been; for neither of
them is alleged in the plea. As, therefore, this plea relies solely on the menace as
to the goods, under which the agreement was made, for avoiding it, we think it
discloses no answer to the declaration …
Commentary
While the unlawful detention of another’s goods did not constitute duress, there was at
the same time authority to support the proposition that money paid to release goods
which had been unlawfully detained could be recovered. Authority for the latter
proposition is 
Astley
 
v. 
Reynolds
 
(1731) 2 Str 915. The plaintiff pawned a plate to the
defendant for £20. Three years later the defendant refused to allow the plaintiff to
redeem the plate unless he paid him interest of £10. The plaintiff tendered £4 but the
defendant refused to accept it and refused to release the plate. The plaintiff eventually
paid the £10 in order to get his plate back, and then brought an action to recover the
excess which he had paid over the legal interest which the defendant was entitled to
charge. It was held that the plaintiff was entitled to the recovery of the money so paid
under compulsion. Holt CJ stated (at p. 916):
We think … that this is a payment by compulsion; the plaintiff might have such an immediate want of his goods,
that an action of trover would not do his business: where the rule volenti non fit injuria is applied, it must be
where the party had his freedom of exercising his will, which this man had not: we must take it he paid the
money relying on his legal remedy to get it back again.
As the editors of Goff and Jones have pointed out (
The Law of Unjust Enrichment
 
(9th
edn, Sweet & Maxwell, 2016), para 10–39), the decisions in 
Skeate
 
and 
Astley
 
require a
distinction to be drawn between the following two cases:
[I]f A demands a sum of money from B under duress of goods, and B pays the money, then he can recover it; yet
if B makes a promise to pay a sum of money under similar duress from A, then provided that there is some
consideration for the promise, B is bound to pay the money.
The editors of Goff and Jones continue (at para 10–40):
It is logically very difficult to support a distinction of this kind, since there must have been a 
scintilla temporis
when A must have agreed to pay before making the payment. In 
Skeate
 
Lord Denman CJ justified the rule on
the ground that, whereas duress to the person is a 
‘constraining force’, ‘the fear that goods may be taken or
injured does not deprive anyone of his free agency who possesses that ordinary degree of firmness which the
law requires all to exert’. But this requirement of bravery has surely now been abandoned. In fact, the rule in
Skeate
 
is in direct conflict with the modern view of duress, namely, that where a transaction has been entered
into as a result of illegitimate pressure, consent has not been freely given and the transaction is voidable … the
current law is that an agreement induced by duress of goods is voidable at the instance of the coerced party, so
that any money paid thereunder will be recoverable in an action for unjust enrichment.
Authority for the proposition that 
Skeate
 
v. 
Beale
 
is no longer good law is to be found in
the speech of Lord Goff in 
Dimskal Shipping Co SA
 
v. 
International Transport Workers’
Federation (The Evia Luck)
 
[1992] 2 AC 152 (
18.4.1
).
18.4
 
Economic Duress
As has been noted (
18.1
), economic duress was a late arrival in English law, not being
formally recognized until the decision of Kerr J in 
Occidental Worldwide Investment
Corporation
 
v. 
Skibs A/S Avanti (The Siboen and The Sibotre)
 
[1976] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 293.
Since then it has had a somewhat chequered career. One of the principal difficulties has
been in identifying the elements that have to be proved in order to make out a case of
economic duress. However, the stage has now been reached in the development of
economic duress where the principal elements of economic duress have been
authoritatively determined. Lord Burrows in 
Pakistan International Airline
Corporation
 
v. 
Times Travel (UK) Ltd
 
[2021] UKSC 40, [2021] 3 WLR 727, [78]–[79]
(see 
18.1
) identified the three essential elements to an economic duress claim, namely (i)
a threat or pressure exerted by the defendant that is illegitimate, (ii) that illegitimate
threat or pressure caused the claimant to enter into the contract, and (iii) the claimant
must have had no reasonable alternative to giving in to the threat or pressure. Of these
elements the most difficult is the identification of pressure or threats that are for this
purpose ‘illegitimate.’ We shall therefore postpone the discussion of the meaning of
‘illegitimate’ until after our examination of the other two essential elements of economic
duress.
18.4.1
 
Causation
In his judgment in 
Pakistan International Airline Corporation
 
v. 
Times Travel (UK)
Ltd
 
[2021] UKSC 40, [2021] 3 WLR 727, [78] Lord Burrows, when discussing the test
that is to be applied when seeking to determine whether there is a sufficient causal link
between the illegitimate pressure or threat and the decision of the claimant to enter into
the contract, quoted from the judgment of Lord Goff in 
Dimskal Shipping Co SA
 
v.
International Transport Workers’ Federation (The Evia Luck) (No 2)
 
[1992] 2 AC 152,
165. A slightly fuller extract from the judgment of Lord Goff captures the essence of his
judgment on this issue:
It was at one time thought that, at common law, the only form of duress which would entitle a party to avoid a
contract on that ground was duress of the person. The origin for this 
view lay in the decision of the Court of
Exchequer in 
Skeate
 
v. 
Beale
 
(1841) 11 Ad & El 983. However, since the decisions of Kerr J in 
Occidental
Worldwide Investment Corporation
 
v. 
Skibs A/S Avanti (The Siboen and The Sibotre)
 
[1976] 1 Lloyd’s Rep
293, of Mocatta J in 
North Ocean Shipping Co Ltd
 
v. 
Hyundai Construction Co Ltd
 
[1979] QB 705, and of the
Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in 
Pao On
 
v. 
Lau Yiu Long
 
[1980] AC 614, that limitation has been
discarded; and it is now accepted that economic pressure may be sufficient to amount to duress for this
purpose, provided at least that the economic pressure may be characterised as illegitimate and has constituted a
significant cause inducing the plaintiff to enter into the relevant contract (see 
Barton
 
v. 
Armstrong
 
[1976] AC
104, 121, per Lord Wilberforce and Lord Simon of Glaisdale (referred to with approval in 
Pao On
 
v. 
Lau Yiu
Long
 
[1980] AC 614, 635, per Lord Scarman) and 
Crescendo Management Pty. Ltd
 
v. 
Westpac Banking
Corporation
 
(1988) 19 NSWLR 40, 46, per McHugh JA). It is sometimes suggested that the plaintiff’s will must
have been coerced so as to vitiate his consent. This approach has been the subject of criticism; see Beatson, 
The
Use and Abuse of Unjust Enrichment
 
(1991), 113–17; and the notes by Professor Atiyah in (1982) 98 
LQR
 
197–
202, and by Professor Birks in [1990] 3 
LMCLQ
 
342–51. I myself, like McHugh JA, doubt whether it is helpful
in this context to speak of the plaintiff’s will having been coerced. It is not however necessary to explore the
matter in the present case.
Two points should be noted here. The first relates to Lord Goff’s comments concerning
the coercion of the will theory and his apparent approval of the criticisms that have been
levelled against that theory. The second point relates to his insertion of the word
‘significant’ before ‘cause’. The addition of ‘significant’ is important and is to be
contrasted with the approach taken in 
Barton
 
v. 
Armstrong
 
[1976] AC 104 (on which
see 
18.2
) where it was held that the pressure need only be ‘a’ cause of the decision to
enter into the contract. Why does the law appear to differentiate in this way between
cases of duress of the person and cases of economic duress?
It is at least clear that the test for causation in cases of economic duress is more
stringent than that adopted in the context of duress of the person. The more difficult
question relates to the extent of that difference and whether a ‘significant cause’ test
differs from the traditional ‘but for’ test. In many ways it would be more straightforward
were the courts to conclude that a ‘significant cause’ is, for this purpose, to be equated
with the ‘but for’ test (a view which derives support from the judgment of Christopher
Clarke J in 
Kolmar Group AG
 
v. 
Traxpo Enterprises Pty Ltd
 
[2010] EWHC 113
(Comm), [2010] 2 Lloyd’s Rep 653, [92]). On the other hand, as Mance J observed in
Huyton SA v Peter Cremer GmbH & Co
 
[1999] 1 Lloyd’s Rep 620, 636–9, a simple
application of the ‘but for’ test ‘could lead too readily to relief being granted’. But it is
important to note that Mance J also had regard to the other elements of an economic
duress claim, in particular the availability of alternative forms of redress. Thus it may be
that it is these other elements that will keep the doctrine of economic duress within
reasonable bounds and that there is no need to depart from the more traditional ‘but for’
test in this context. An alternative approach would be to avoid drawing hard-and-fast
lines in this area, leaving it to the courts to apply a sliding scale according to which the
causal threshold diminishes as the degree of illegitimacy increases (so that threats to kill
are at one end of the spectrum, where the causal requirement is at its lowest, and cases
of economic duress at the other). The difficulty with the latter approach is that it leads to
uncertainty and so for this reason it may be preferable to apply the ‘but for’ test to cases
of economic duress. The point does, however, await authoritative resolution.
18.4.2
 
The Lack of Reasonable Alternatives
In his judgment in 
Pakistan International Airline Corporation
 
v. 
Times Travel (UK)
Ltd
 
[2021] UKSC 40, [2021] 3 WLR 727, [79] (see 
18.1
) Lord Burrows referred to the
requirement that the claimant must have had no reasonable alternative to giving in to
the threat (or pressure). As he observed, it would appear that this requirement is
applicable to cases of economic duress but not to other forms of duress (thus further
emphasizing the differences that exist between cases of economic duress and other
forms of duress). One of the authorities which he cited in support of this requirement
was the judgment of Lord Saville, giving the judgment of the Privy Council in 
Borrelli
 
v.
Ting
 
[2010] UKPC 21, [35], where he stated:
The Board is of the view that in the present case the Liquidators entered into the Settlement Agreement as the
result of the illegitimate means employed by James Henry Ting, namely by opposing the scheme for no good
reason and in using forgery and false evidence in support of that opposition, all in order to prevent the
Liquidators from investigating his conduct of the affairs of Akai Holdings Ltd or making claims against him
arising out of that conduct. As the Board has already observed, by adopting these means James Henry Ting left
the Liquidators with no reasonable or practical alternative but to enter into the Settlement Agreement.
A case which illustrates the role that the lack of reasonable alternatives can play in cases
of alleged economic duress is provided by the decision of the Court of Appeal in 
B & S
Contracts and Design Ltd
 
v. 
Victor Green Publications Ltd
 
[1984] ICR 419. The
plaintiffs agreed to erect stands at Olympia for the defendants but they experienced
difficulties with their workforce, who refused to erect the stands unless they were paid
£9,000 in severance pay. The plaintiffs offered to pay the workmen £4,500 but this offer
was rejected. When the defendants were informed of these difficulties, they offered to
provide the plaintiffs with an advance of £4,500 but this offer was also rejected by the
plaintiffs. The plaintiffs informed the defendants that they would be unable to perform
the contract unless their workforce could be persuaded to stay at work. In these
circumstances one of the defendants’ directors said to the plaintiffs’ finance director
‘Well, you have me over a barrel’ and so the defendants paid £4,500 to the plaintiffs.
The defendants then deducted the £4,500 from the final sum due to the plaintiffs. The
plaintiffs responded by suing the defendants for £4,500. The defendants resisted the
claim on the ground that the money had been paid under duress. The Court of Appeal
held that the money had indeed been paid under duress so that the defendants were not
liable to pay the £4,500 demanded by the plaintiffs. The clearest articulation of the
significance of the lack of reasonable available alternatives is to be found in the
judgment of Kerr LJ who stated:
I … bear in mind that a threat to break a contract unless money is paid by the other party can, but by no means
always will, constitute duress. It appears from the authorities that it will only constitute duress if the
consequences of a refusal would be serious and immediate so that there is no reasonable alternative open, such
as by legal redress, obtaining an injunction, etc … There was no other practical choice open to the defendants in
the present case, and accordingly I agree that this is a case where money has been paid under duress, which was
accordingly recoverable by the defendants provided they acted promptly as they did, and which they have
recovered by deducting it from the contract price …
Support for the significance of the lack of reasonable available alternatives can also be
gleaned from the judgment of Griffiths LJ in the same case who stated that the
defendants 
were in an ‘impossible position’ and that if they had not paid the £4,500 they
would have ‘caused grave damage to their reputation’ and might have exposed
themselves to heavy claims in damages from exhibitors who had leased space at the
exhibitions.
It is important to observe the role that a lack of a reasonable alternative plays in the case
law. It is but one element in the inquiry. Thus a claimant who proves that he had no
other option open to him but to agree to the terms proposed by the defendant will not be
able thereby to establish a case of duress, at least where the defendant has not applied
any illegitimate pressure. It is for this reason that a person who sells his house for a low
price because he concludes that he has no alternative open to him but to sell at the
proposed price cannot set aside the contract on the ground of duress. However, the
reasonable alternative requirement assumes significance in the case where the claimant
does have a reasonable alternative open to it, but decides not to take it. So on the facts of
B & S Contracts and Design
 
matters might have been different had the defendants had
the time available to them in order to go off to court in order to contest the validity of
the plaintiffs’ demand, or had they been able lawfully to terminate the contract with the
plaintiffs and obtain performance elsewhere. In such circumstances, the presence of a
reasonable alternative might have prevented them from making good their claim that
they had only agreed to pay the £4,500 under duress.
18.4.3
 
Illegitimate Pressure
When is a threat or the application of pressure ‘illegitimate’ for the purposes of the law
relating to economic duress? In 
R
 
v. 
Attorney-General for England and Wales
 
[2003]
UKPC 22, [16] Lord Hoffmann, giving the judgment of the Privy Council, stated:
16. The legitimacy of the pressure must be examined from two aspects: first, the nature of the pressure and
secondly, the nature of the demand which the pressure is applied to support: see Lord Scarman in the 
Universe
Tankships
 
case, at p. 401. Generally speaking, the threat of any form of unlawful action will be regarded as
illegitimate. On the other hand, the fact that the threat is lawful does not necessarily make the pressure
legitimate. As Lord Atkin said in 
Thorne
 
v. 
Motor Trade Association
 
[1937] AC 797, 806:
‘The ordinary blackmailer normally threatens to do what he has a perfect right to do—namely,
communicate some compromising conduct to a person whose knowledge is likely to affect the person
threatened … What he has to justify is not the threat, but the demand of money.’
Lord Hoffmann thus appeared to envisage a two-stage approach to illegitimacy. First, if
the threat or the pressure is unlawful, it will generally be illegitimate. Secondly, where
the threat is lawful but is used to support a demand which amounts to blackmail, it will
also be regarded as illegitimate. In this section we shall examine the approach of the
courts to the identification of illegitimate pressure or threats in two contexts. The first is
where the threat takes the form of a threatened breach of contract. The second is where
the threat is to do something which the defendant is entitled to do. Both issues have
given rise to difficulty, but the second of them has proved to be particularly difficult and
it was the subject of the recent decision of the Supreme Court in 
Pakistan International
Airline Corporation
 
v. 
Times Travel (UK) Ltd
 
[2021] UKSC 40, [2021] 3 WLR 727.
First, however, we will deal with those cases in which the illegitimate pressure is said to
take the form of a threatened breach of contract.
18.4.3.1
 
Illegitimate Pressure and Threats to Breach a
Contract
Where the threat made, or pressure applied, by the defendant takes the form of a threat
to commit an unlawful act, such as a crime or a tort, the courts have generally
experienced no difficulty in concluding that such a threat is ‘illegitimate’ (see, for
example, 
Universe Tankships of Monrovia
 
v. 
International Transport Workers’
Federation (The Universe Sentinel)
 
[1983] 1 AC 366). More problematic is the case
where the pressure or threat assumes the form of a threatened breach of contract.
A breach of contract is not unlawful in the sense that it amounts to a crime. A breach of
contract will only rarely involve the commission of a criminal offence. But a breach of
contract is a civil wrong (as is the commission of a tort) so that a party who threatens to
breach a contract is threatening to do something which it is not lawfully entitled to do.
On this basis one might expect a threatened breach of contract always to be classified as
an illegitimate threat for the purposes of economic duress. On the other hand, there are
some signs of a reluctance to conclude that all threatened breaches of contract are
illegitimate, particularly in the case where the party issuing the threat believed in all
good faith that it was entitled to make the demand which it made. It is not uncommon
for there to be some uncertainty as to the correct interpretation of the contract (see
generally 
Chapter 11
). In such a case there may be a genuine doubt as to whether or not
the defendant was entitled to make the threat which it made. If the matter is
subsequently litigated, and a court determines that the defendant was mistaken in its
interpretation of the contract so that it was in fact threatening to breach the contract
between the parties, does it automatically follow in such a case that the threat made is
an illegitimate one? On one view the answer is that it should automatically follow
because the existence of a breach of contract does not generally depend upon the good
faith or bad faith of the party who is said to be in breach. Given that the presence of
good faith on the part of the party said to be in breach is not a defence to the claim that
the contract has been breached, why should it be a relevant factor when considering
whether the threat is ‘illegitimate’? On the other hand, there is a concern that a
conclusion that all threatened breaches of contract are illegitimate could make it more
difficult for parties to renegotiate a contract because of the fear that a bona fide attempt
to defend one’s own position could subsequently be characterized as the application of
illegitimate pressure.
An early case in which a court was required to consider whether a threatened breach of
contract amounted to the application of economic duress is the decision of Mocatta J in
the following case:
NORTH OCEAN SHIPPING CO LTD V. HYUNDAI
CONSTRUCTION CO LTD (THE ATLANTIC BARON)
[1979] QB 705, Queen’s Bench Division
In 1972 the defendants entered into a contract under which they agreed to
construct a tanker for the plaintiffs. The contract stated that the price, which was to
be paid in US dollars, was not to be subject to adjustment except in certain specific
circumstances (which did not occur). In June 1973, after the devaluation of the
dollar by 10 per cent, the defendants demanded that they be paid an extra 10 per
cent for the work done under the contract. The plaintiffs refused to pay the money
so demanded on the ground that there was no basis in law for the demand, and
they suggested that the matter be referred to arbitration. The defendants refused to
agree to this suggestion and they threatened to terminate the contract if the sum
was not paid. The plaintiffs were advised that the defendants were not entitled to
make such a demand under the terms of the contract but, as a result of an
advantageous 
sub-contract into which they had entered, they were anxious to
obtain delivery of the tanker at the agreed time, and so they promised to pay the
extra sum demanded. They paid the additional 10 per cent on each of the
remaining instalments, and the ship was delivered to the plaintiffs in November
1974. In July 1975 the plaintiffs sought to recover the extra 10 per cent on the
ground that there was no consideration for their payment and that they had agreed
to make the payment only when subject to duress. The court held that there was
consideration to support the agreement but that the plaintiffs had entered into the
contract as a result of duress. However the plaintiffs were held not to be entitled to
set aside the contract because they had affirmed the contract by making the final
payments without protest and by their delay in making their claim for repayment.
Mocatta J
[Having reached the conclusion that there was consideration for the agreement
turned to consider whether it should be set aside on the ground of economic
duress.]
Before proceeding further it may be useful to summarise the conclusions I have
so far reached. First, I do not take the view that the recovery of money paid under
duress other than to the person is necessarily limited to duress to goods falling
within one of the categories hitherto established by the English cases. … Secondly,
from this it follows that the compulsion may take the form of ‘economic duress’ if
the necessary facts are proved. A threat to break a contract may amount to such
‘economic duress’. Thirdly, if there has been such a form of duress leading to a
contract for consideration, I think that contract is a voidable one which can be
avoided and the excess money paid under it recovered.
I think the facts found in this case do establish that the agreement to increase
the price by 10% reached at the end of June 1973 was caused by what may be
called ‘economic duress’. The Yard were adamant in insisting on the increased
price without having any legal justification for so doing and the owners realised that
the Yard would not accept anything other than an unqualified agreement to the
increase. The owners might have claimed damages in arbitration against the Yard
with all the inherent unavoidable uncertainties of litigation, but in view of the
position of the Yard vis-à-vis their relations with Shell it would be unreasonable to
hold that this is the course they should have taken: see 
Astley
 
v. 
Reynolds
 
(1731)
2 Str 915. The owners made a very reasonable offer of arbitration coupled with
security for any award in the Yard’s favour that might be made, but this was
refused. They then made their agreement, which can truly I think be said to have
been made under compulsion, by the telex of June 28 without prejudice to their
rights. I do not consider the Yard’s ignorance of the Shell charter material. It may
well be that had they known of it they would have been even more exigent. …
The owners were … free from the duress on November 27, 1974, and took no
action by way of protest or otherwise between their important telex of June 28,
1973, and their formal claim for the return of the excess 10% paid of July 30, 1975.
… I have come to the conclusion that … the correct inference to draw, taking an
objective view of the facts, is that the action and inaction of the owners can only be
regarded as an affirmation of the variation in June 1973 of the terms of the original
contract by the agreement to pay the additional 10 per cent.
Commentary
In this case, decided at an early stage in the development of economic duress, one can
see clear authority for the proposition that a threatened breach of contract can
constitute economic duress. In reaching the conclusion that the agreement to pay the
higher sum was 
caused by economic duress, Mocatta J did not ask himself whether or
not the defendants were in bad faith in demanding that the plaintiffs pay an extra 10 per
cent. The fact that he did not ask the question suggests that, for him, it was not a
relevant consideration. Further, it can be said that the present case demonstrates that it
may be no easy task to define ‘bad faith’ in this context. It could be said that the
defendants were in bad faith in that they knew that they were not entitled to the extra 10
per cent. On the other hand, they had what might be called a ‘good reason’ for
demanding the extra money on the basis that they were simply attempting to cover
themselves against devaluation of the dollar: they were not seeking to exploit any
vulnerability on the part of the plaintiffs.
Subsequent cases have confirmed the validity of the proposition that a threatened
breach of contract will generally amount to the application of illegitimate pressure (see,
for example, 
Universe Tankships of Monrovia
 
v. 
International Transport Workers’
Federation (The Universe Sentinel)
 
[1983] 1 AC 366, 
Atlas Express Ltd
 
v. 
Kafco
 
[1989]
QB 833, and 
Carillion Construction Ltd
 
v. 
Felix (UK) Ltd
 
[2001] BLR 1) but they have
stopped short of affirming that it will always do so. Further, there are cases in which the
defendant appeared to threaten to breach its contract with the claimant but the court
nevertheless concluded that there had been no duress on the facts. These cases may,
however, be explicable on grounds other than the illegitimacy of the threat. Thus in
Williams
 
v. 
Roffey Bros & Nicholls (Contractors) Ltd
 
[1991] 1 QB 1 (see 
5.2.2.3.2
) there
does not seem to have been any ‘threat’ made by the plaintiff to break the contract given
that the offer to pay more for the completion of the work appeared to have been made
voluntarily by the defendant at a meeting between the parties. A second case in which
there was found to be no economic duress is 
DSDN Subsea Ltd
 
v. 
Petroleum Geo-
Services ASA
 
[2000] BLR 530, [131], where Dyson J included among the factors to be
taken into account by a court when determining whether there has been illegitimate
pressure ‘whether the person allegedly exerting the pressure has acted in good or bad
faith’. However, on the facts of the case, the threat to break the contract did not seem to
have been a significant cause of the decision to enter into the contract, given the lack of
contemporaneous evidence to substantiate the claim that economic duress had been
exercised and so the case may properly be explained on the latter ground and it did not
therefore turn on the presence or absence of good faith.
The current state of the law was, perhaps, best summed up by Christopher Clarke J in
Kolmar Group AG
 
v. 
Traxpo Enterprises Pty Ltd
 
[2010] EWHC 113 (Comm), [2010] 2
Lloyd’s Rep 653, [92], when he stated that ‘a threat to break a contract will generally be
regarded as illegitimate, particularly where the defendant must know that it would be in
breach of contract if the threat were implemented’. The words ‘generally’ and
‘particularly’ are important here. ‘Generally’ suggests that there is no absolute rule and
that it may be necessary to have regard to the facts and circumstances of the individual
case. ‘Particularly’ is noteworthy in so far as it identifies the case in which a threatened
breach of contract is most likely to be illegitimate, namely in the case where the
defendant knows that it is not entitled to make the threat that it has made. This leaves
the difficult case of the party who genuinely but incorrectly believed that it was entitled
to make the threat which it made. Cases such as 
The Atlantic Baron
 
suggest that good
faith on the part of the defendant should not prevent a court from concluding that the
pressure was illegitimate and this view derives support from the fact that, as has been
noted, English law does not generally distinguish between a good faith and a bad faith
breach of contract. On this basis it is suggested that a threatened breach of contract
should generally constitute the application of illegitimate pressure, although the
possibility cannot be ruled out that a court, in an exceptional case, may conclude that
the pressure applied was not illegitimate when account is taken of the fact that the
defendant acted in good faith in making the demand which it made.
The Atlantic Baron
 
is also significant in so far as it demonstrates that a party who
wishes to rely on economic duress in order to set aside an agreement should act quickly
once freed from the duress. A party who is dilatory in making a complaint of duress is
likely to be held to have affirmed the contract. This leads on to the third point which is
that Mocatta J concluded that duress rendered the contract voidable, and not ‘void’ as in
Barton
 
v. 
Armstrong
 
(
18.2
). It is now generally accepted that economic duress renders a
contract voidable and not void.
Finally, the case underlines the link between consideration and duress (on which see
The Atlantic Baron
)
 
in that the first point taken by the plaintiffs was that there was no
consideration for their promise to pay an extra 10 per cent. Mocatta J found that
consideration had been supplied but would have set the contract aside on the ground of
duress had the plaintiffs not affirmed the contract. This might be said to be an example
of duress being used as the more appropriate regulator of contract modifications.
18.4.3.2
 
Lawful Act Duress
Perhaps the most difficult issue in the law of economic duress is the question whether
English law should recognize a doctrine of lawful act duress. This was the issue at the
heart of the recent decision of the Supreme Court in 
Pakistan International Airline
Corporation
 
v. 
Times Travel (UK) Ltd
 
[2021] UKSC 40, [2021] 3 WLR 727.
On the facts of the case the claimant travel agents sought to set aside an agreement into
which it had entered with the defendant airline company (‘PIAC’). The claimant’s
business consisted almost entirely of the sale to the local Pakistani community of air
tickets for travel to Pakistan and at the relevant time PIAC was the only operator who
provided direct flights between the UK and Pakistan. Following a dispute between PIAC
and a number of its agents over the non-payment of commission to the agents, PIAC
gave notice to terminate its existing agency contracts and it offered to its agents new
contracts on terms that the agents waived their existing claims against PIAC for unpaid
commission. In giving notice to terminate the existing contract and in offering new
terms to the claimant, PIAC was acting lawfully. The claimant accepted the terms
proposed by PIAC but subsequently brought proceedings to set aside the agreement on
the ground that it had entered into the new agreement as a result of the application by
PIAC of economic duress and it sought to recover from PIAC the unpaid commission
under its previous agency contract with PIAC. It was held by the Supreme Court that the
claimant was not entitled to set aside the agreement on the ground of economic duress.
There are two principal aspects to the decision of the Supreme Court. The first relates to
the question whether or not English law recognizes a doctrine of lawful act duress. The
Supreme Court unanimously answered this question in the affirmative. The second
aspect relates to the scope of the doctrine of lawful act duress. On this issue there was
some common ground between the Justices of the Supreme Court but it was also an
issue on which the Supreme Court divided. The majority judgment was given by Lord
Hodge, with whom Lord Reed, Lord Lloyd-Jones, and Lord Kitchin expressed their
agreement. The minority judgment on the issues where the court divided was given by
Lord Burrows (although it is important to note that Lord Hodge expressed his
agreement with the judgment of Lord Burrows on a number of issues and on these
issues the judgment of Lord Burrows has the support of the entire court and so
represents the judgment of the court). It is also worth noting that, while the context for
the consideration of lawful act duress was a case of alleged economic duress, the
judgments of the Supreme Court extend beyond economic duress and take account of a
broader range of circumstances in which the exercise of lawful act duress may entitle a
party to set aside a contract.
Our analysis will proceed in four stages. At the first stage (
18.4.3.2.1
) consideration will
be given to the question whether English law recognizes a doctrine of lawful act duress.
At the second stage (
18.4.3.2.2
) attention will switch to the scope of lawful act duress in
English law and to those issues relating to the scope of lawful act duress which were
unanimously agreed by the Supreme Court. The third stage (
18.4.3.2.3
) is the most
difficult stage and it consists of an analysis of the grounds on which the Supreme Court
diverged in relation to the scope of lawful act duress. The fourth and final stage
(
18.4.3.2.4
) will offer some concluding observations.
18.4.3.2.1
 
Does Lawful Act Duress Exist?
The judgment of the Supreme Court on the issue of whether or not English law
recognizes a doctrine of lawful act duress was given by Lord Burrows, with whom Lord
Hodge and the other judges in the Supreme Court expressed their agreement. Lord
Burrows stated:
82. Lawful act duress is controversial. This is essentially because many contracts are entered into under some
form of pressure exerted by the other party and, plainly, one would not wish to undermine all such contracts.
An insistence that the threat must be one to do something unlawful draws a clear line with a standard that is
easily understood and can easily be applied. But once one crosses that line to include threats of lawful acts, it is
not easy to distinguish between threats that will count as duress and threats that will not. Peter Birks, in 
An
Introduction to the Law of Restitution
, revised ed (1989), at p 177, expressed this difficulty as follows:
‘Can lawful pressures also count? This is a difficult question, because, if the answer is that they can, the
only viable basis for discriminating between acceptable and unacceptable pressures is not positive law but
social morality. In other words, the judges must say what pressures … are improper as contrary to
prevailing standards. That makes the judges, not the law or the legislature, the arbiters of social
evaluation.’
. …
83.
 
The fear of wide-ranging disruption and uncertainty, particularly for commercial parties, has led some
distinguished commentators to argue that lawful act duress should not exist. …
85.
 
I am also conscious that lawful act duress has been rejected by the Court of Appeal of New South Wales
in 
Australia and New Zealand Banking Group Ltd
 
v. 
Karam
 
[2005] NSWCA 344; (2005) 64 NSWLR 149
(albeit that one needs to be careful in making comparisons given that particular statutory interventions in that
jurisdiction may be thought relevant). …
86.
 
Despite that support for the non-recognition or abolition of lawful act duress, it is my view (as it was the
view of Birks in the continuation of the passage cited in para 82 above) that lawful act duress does, and should,
exist as a ground for rescinding a contract (or for the restitution of non-contractual payments) in English law.
There are three reasons for this.
87.
 
The first reason is that, although the facts of the leading cases of 
The Universe Sentinel
 
and 
The Evia
Luck (No 2)
 
concerned alleged unlawful act duress—by threats to commit a tort in the context of the ‘blacking’
of ships sailing under flags of convenience—the House of Lords chose to use the language of the pressure
needing to be ‘illegitimate’ not ‘unlawful’. …
88.
 
The second reason is that the crime of blackmail, which is contained in section 21 of the Theft Act 1968,
clearly includes threats of lawful action. … Classic examples of (the actus reus of) blackmail involving lawful
threats would be a threat by A, unless money is 
paid by B, to reveal true information about B to a newspaper or
to B’s family or to the police. Although the link between the crime of blackmail and lawful act duress has to be
very carefully handled to avoid circularity—this is best done by excluding the possibility of the crime of
blackmail having been committed when considering what counts as lawful act duress—it would be very odd for
the civil law of duress not to include threats of lawful acts when the criminal law of blackmail does so. Lord
Scarman expressly drew an analogy with blackmail in 
The Universe Sentinel
 
at p 401. …
89.
 
The third reason is that there have been several cases—and not just recent cases—in which it has been
accepted that threats of lawful action should entitle the threatened party (the claimant) to rescind a contract (or
to have the restitution of non-contractual payments). A long-established area, although traditionally thought of
as within the equitable doctrine of undue influence rather than the common law doctrine of duress, has
comprised illegitimate threats to prosecute the claimant or a member of the claimant’s family. These were not
economic duress cases. Rather the threats in question were threats to reputation or emotional threats. But the
important point is that (avoiding the circularity of blackmail: see the previous paragraph), the threats in
question were threats to do lawful acts. So, for example, in 
Williams
 
v. 
Bayley
 
1 HL 200 a father agreed to pay
promissory notes in favour of a bank (secured by a charge over his property) in order to avert the bank’s implied
threat to prosecute his son for forging his signature on the notes. As a separate ground from the contract being
‘illegal’ (as stifling a criminal prosecution) it was held that the contract was invalid as it had been procured by
undue influence. And in 
Mutual Finance Ltd
 
v. 
John Wetton and Sons Ltd
 
[1937] 2 KB 389 a guarantee of
payment to the claimant company was signed by Percy Wetton on behalf of the defendant company in order to
avert the claimant company’s implied threat to prosecute Joseph Wetton (Percy’s brother) for forgery in
acquiring a lorry on hire purchase. Percy Wetton signed the agreement for fear that prosecution of his brother
would kill their father who was very ill. Porter J distinguished duress at common law, which he regarded as
being confined to duress of the person, but held that the contract here was voidable for undue influence. See
also, for example, 
Kaufman
 
v. 
Gerson
 
[1904] 1 KB 591.
90.
 
Although these cases may have used the language of undue influence, it is clear that they were not
concerned with the standard case of undue influence where the relationship between the parties is such that one
party’s judgment is not being exercised freely and independently of the other party. That standard area of
‘relational’ undue influence was not in issue in those cases. Rather one was looking at actual undue influence
where the influence was being exerted by a lawful threat. At the time of those cases, and prior to the
development of economic duress in the 1970s, common law duress was thought to be confined to duress of the
person or, in the context of the restitution of non-contractual payments, duress of goods. The threats in
question in those cases were not ones of physical violence or detainment or to seize or retain goods. They
therefore fell outside those two categories of common law duress. But now that economic duress has been
recognised at common law, there is no reason to hive off those earlier cases from duress by labelling them as
cases on undue influence. On the contrary, the underlying element is identical—it is an illegitimate, albeit
lawful, threat—and it is therefore rational today to treat them as examples of duress (albeit not economic
duress). …
91.
 
Furthermore, since the recognition of economic duress, there have been several cases in which lawful
act economic duress can be said to have been accepted as a ground for the avoidance of a contract or restitution
(whether made out on the facts or not) …
92.
 
For these three reasons, the better view is that, although controversial, lawful act duress does, and
should, exist as a matter of English law.
At paragraphs [83] and [84] Lord Burrows refers to the writings of academics who have
been critical of the proposition that English law should recognise a doctrine of lawful act
duress. In essence their view is that the making of a lawful threat should not in principle
suffice to set aside a contract and that certainty and stability in the law would best be
provided by a firm rule that lawful act duress act does not exist. A clear rule to this effect
is believed by such writers to be preferable to a recognition of the possibility of an
exception which is of such narrow scope that it will never in practice be invoked but
which may result in expensive litigation as parties attempt, unsuccessfully, to rely on the
possibility of there being such an exception. Powerful though these arguments are, they
did not persuade the Supreme Court for the reasons given by Lord Burrows. It is a very
bold step to shut the door completely on the recognition of lawful act duress. It is for
this reason that many judges are very reluctant, or refuse, to say never to the existence
of a claim. Further, some of the commentators who appear to wish to shut the door
completely on a lawful act duress claim may in fact leave open another escape route for
the courts. Thus Professor Virgo, one of the authors cited by Lord Burrows, states that ‘a
lawful threat may still result in restitution, but only … if the more stringent test of
unconscionability is satisfied’. It is not obvious that this approach results in greater
certainty because it simply moves the problem elsewhere, namely to the doctrine of
unconscionability. It is also, as Lord Burrows observes, very difficult to shut the door
entirely on lawful act duress given the existence of the blackmail cases (unless one treats
these cases as cases in which the ground for intervention by the courts is not duress but
the commission of a criminal offence). Although the issue is a difficult one, the approach
adopted by Lord Burrows has the merit of recognizing openly that there may be
exceptional cases in which lawful act duress can, for the reasons which he gave, suffice
to set aside a contract. On this basis it is suggested that the Supreme Court was correct
to conclude that lawful duress does exist as a matter of English law.
18.4.3.2.2
 
Common Ground on the Scope of Lawful Act Duress
There were a number of issues in relation to the scope of lawful act duress on which the
Supreme Court was unanimous. The first is that there was agreement on the importance
of certainty and clarity in commercial contract law and that there is ‘a significant danger’
that the reputation of English law for certainty and clarity would be lost if the law on
lawful act economic duress were to be stated ‘too widely or with insufficient precision’
(see [93]). This being the case, lawful act duress should be kept within very narrow
confines.
Secondly, it was agreed that ‘because the threat is of a lawful act, the question of
whether it is illegitimate should focus on the nature of the demand rather than the
nature of the threat’ ([96]), a proposition which is classically reflected in the case of
blackmail where the blackmailer has to justify the demand for money, not the threat
which has been made, given that the ordinarily blackmailer often threatens to do what
he has a right to do.
Thirdly, it was agreed that, in the context of lawful act economic duress, ‘a demand
motivated by commercial self-interest is, in general, justified’ ([136](iv) and to similar
effect see [97]–[99]). Thus Lord Burrows stated (at [136](iv)) that ‘lawful act economic
duress is essentially concerned with identifying rare exceptional cases where a demand,
motivated by commercial self-interest, is nevertheless unjustified’.
Fourthly, there was agreement that it was not appropriate to develop the law by
adopting an approach based on a ‘range of factors’ according to which a court would
have regard to a number of factors when deciding whether lawful act duress should
entitle a party to set aside a contract. There was held to be no need to inject such a
degree of uncertainty into a developing area of the law. On the contrary, Lord Burrows
stated (at [94]) that the law 
relating to lawful act duress was ‘in its infancy and the best
approach is for the common law to be clarified or developed in a traditional incremental
way’.
The final issue on which there was unanimity was that this was not an appropriate case
in which to rely on a general principle of good faith dealing ([95]) and, in this context,
Lord Burrows stated ([95]) that ‘the better strategy, at this stage in the law’s
development, is to try to set out a limited but clear and workable boundary for the
concept of lawful act economic duress in the context of the facts with which this case is
concerned’.
18.4.3.2.3
 
Differences in Relation to the Scope of Lawful Act Duress
Although Lord Burrows stated that the ‘better strategy’ was to seek to establish a ‘limited
but clear and workable boundary for the concept of lawful act economic duress’ the
Supreme Court found it much more difficult to establish these boundaries and indeed
they disagreed as to the limits of lawful act duress. As has been noted, the division here
is between Lord Hodge (with whom the other Justices of the Supreme Court expressed
their agreement) and Lord Burrows. Given that his approach represents the majority
approach, we shall commence with the analysis of Lord Hodge. We shall then move on
to consider the criticisms made of this approach by Lord Burrows before examining the
approach preferred by Lord Burrows and the reasons given by Lord Hodge for rejecting
that approach.
The analysis of the majority in relation to the scope of lawful act duress was set out by
Lord Hodge in the following terms:
2. …the courts have developed the common law doctrine of duress to include lawful act economic duress by
drawing on the rules of equity in relation to undue influence and treating as ‘illegitimate’ conduct which, when
the law of duress was less developed, had been identified by equity as giving rise to an agreement which it was
unconscionable for the party who had conducted himself or herself in that way to seek to enforce. In other
words, morally reprehensible behaviour which in equity was judged to render the enforcement of a contract
unconscionable in the context of undue influence has been treated by English common law as illegitimate
pressure in the context of duress.
3.
 
The boundaries of the doctrine of lawful act duress are not fixed and the courts should approach any
extension with caution, particularly in the context of contractual negotiations between commercial entities. In
any development of the doctrine of lawful act duress it will also be important to bear in mind not only that
analogous remedies already exist in equity, such as the doctrines of undue influence and unconscionable
bargains, but also the absence in English law of any overriding doctrine of good faith in contracting or any
doctrine of imbalance of bargaining power. …
4.
 
If one focuses on the few cases in which a remedy has been provided for what would now be analysed as
lawful act duress, there are to date two circumstances in which the English courts have recognised and provided
a remedy for such duress. The first circumstance is where a defendant uses his knowledge of criminal activity by
the claimant or a member of the claimant’s close family to obtain a personal benefit from the claimant by the
express or implicit threat to report the crime or initiate a prosecution. The second circumstance is where the
defendant, having exposed himself to a civil claim by the claimant, for example, for damages for breach of
contract, deliberately manoeuvres the claimant into a position of vulnerability by means which the law regards
as illegitimate and thereby forces the claimant to waive his claim. In both categories of case the defendant has
behaved in a highly reprehensible way which the courts have treated as amounting to illegitimate pressure.
A number of points should be noted here. The first is the willingness of Lord Hodge (at
[2]) to draw on the rules of equity in relation to undue influence (on which see 
Chapter
19
) when considering how the law of duress should develop. The second is the need for
caution in the development of the law, particularly where the contract is one entered
into between commercial parties (see [3]). But the most important point relates to the
identification by Lord Hodge (at [4]) of the ‘two circumstances in which the English
courts have recognised and provided a remedy for’ lawful act duress.
Lord Hodge expanded on these two circumstances in paragraphs [5]–[16] of his
judgment. Of the two circumstances, the first is the more straightforward. It consists of
cases in which a defendant exploits knowledge of criminal activity for his own benefit.
Lord Hodge cited three cases that fall within this category, namely 
Williams
 
v. 
Bayley
(1866) LR 1 HL 200 (on which see 
19.1
), 
Kaufman
 
v. 
Gerson
 
[1904] 1 KB 591, and
Mutual Finance Ltd
 
v. 
John Wetton & Sons Ltd
 
[1937] 2 KB 389 (all of which are cited
by Lord Burrows in his judgment at [89] above).
The more difficult exception is the second case, where the defendant uses illegitimate
means to manouevre the claimant into a position of weakness in order to force him to
waive his claim. There would appear to be a number of components to this exception.
First, the claimant must be in a position of vulnerability. Secondly, the defendant must
have deliberately manouevred the claimant into that position of vulnerability. Thirdly,
the means used by the defendant to achieve this must have been ‘illegitimate’ or ‘highly
reprehensible’ or ‘unconscionable’ (all terms used by Lord Hodge). Lord Hodge cited
two examples in this category, namely 
Borrelli
 
v. 
Ting
 
[2010] UKPC 21 and 
Progress
Bulk Carriers Ltd
 
v. 
Tube City IMS LLC (The Cenk Kaptaboglu)
 
[2012] EWHC 273
(Comm), [2012] 2 All ER (Comm) 855 (the latter case is also referred to in the
judgments as 
The Cenk K
).
In 
Progress Bulk Carriers
 
the claimants agreed to charter a vessel to the defendants. In
repudiatory breach of contract the claimants then allocated the vessel to the
performance of another contract and sought to allocate a new vessel to the charter with
the defendants. The claimants initially assured the defendants that they would
compensate the defendants for any loss suffered as a result of their failure to provide the
contracted vessel. The defendants were initially willing to accept the substitution of the
vessel on the basis that they reserved their right to seek damages from the defendants in
respect of any liability which they incurred towards their contracting party as a result of
the loss of the contracted-for vessel. However, the claimants subsequently stipulated
that they would only provide the substitute vessel if the defendants agreed to waive their
right to recover damages in respect of the claimants’ original breach of contract. Given
the late stage at which the claimants introduced this stipulation, the defendants agreed
to it under protest in order to avoid incurring liability to their own customers. It was
held that the agreement under which the defendants agreed to waive their claim against
the claimants was voidable for economic duress.
According to the analysis of Lord Hodge (at [17]), the basis for the decision in 
Progress
Bulk Carriers
 
was (i) the existence of a legal claim by the defendants against the
claimants and (ii) the manoeuvring by the claimants of the defendants by reprehensible
means (namely their prior breach of contract and their subsequent ‘misleading activity’)
into a vulnerable position where the defendants had no alternative but to waive their
pre-existing rights amounted to illegitimate pressure.
One of the difficulties with Lord Hodge’s second category lies in explaining why the facts
of 
Times Travel
 
did not fall within this category. After all, this was a case in which Times
Travel had a claim against PIAC for unpaid commission which it waived after PIAC
withheld a very large amount of commission which it owed to Times Travel, and further
PIAC 
increased the vulnerability of Times Travel by cutting substantially its normal
ticket allocation. This point was picked up by Lord Burrows in the following terms:
132. …On the face of it, PIAC’s conduct seems to fall within Lord Hodge’s lawful act duress category comprising
‘using illegitimate means to manoeuvre the claimant into a position of weakness to force him to waive his claim’.
The fact that the claimant was already in a weak position (because of the monopoly) cannot make the claim for
lawful act economic duress less deserving than if the claimant had been in a stronger bargaining position. It
follows that, in my view, contrary, as I understand it, to that of Lord Hodge, it is the ‘bad faith demand’
requirement, as I have explained it, that is critical to the decision that there was no lawful act economic duress
in this case.
Lord Burrows then moved on to express further concerns in relation to the approach of
Lord Hodge:
133. With great respect, I am also very concerned that, without any focus on the ‘bad faith demand’
requirement, defined in the specific sense that I have set out, and with instead the essential guide being that the
defendant’s conduct must be ‘reprehensible’ or ‘unconscionable’ or using ‘illegitimate means’ (which is, by
definition, distinct from unlawful means), one will be permitting lawful act economic duress to create
considerable uncertainty in the realm of commercial contracts. While not supporting a ‘bad faith demand’
requirement, Lord Hodge also refers at some points to ‘bad faith’ as being relevant (see, for example, paras 56
and 59) but it is not clear to me what Lord Hodge means by that and how that approach is consistent with his
rejection of a ‘good faith dealing’ principle. I have tried to make clear (see para 95) that I am precisely not
advocating a general principle of good faith dealing; and the ‘bad faith demand’ requirement that I have been
relying on … is narrow and sharply defined.
Lord Burrows refers in this section of his judgment to his preferred approach which he
described as his ‘bad faith demand requirement.’ He explained the content of this
requirement with reference to the decision of the Court of Appeal in 
CTN Cash and
Carry Ltd
 
v. 
Gallaher Ltd
 
[1994] 4 All ER 714 (to which we will return at 
18.4.3.2.4
) in
the following section of his judgment.
102. …[
CTN Cash and Carry
] may … be said to establish what I shall refer to hereinafter as the ‘bad faith
demand’ requirement. This requirement can be expressed as follows. In the context we are focusing on—of a
demand for what is claimed to be owing, or analogously, as on the facts of this case, a demand for the waiver of
a claim—it is a necessary requirement for establishing lawful act economic duress that the demand is made in
bad faith in the particular sense that the threatening party does not genuinely believe that it is owed what it is
claiming to be owed or does not genuinely believe that it has a defence to the claim being waived by the
threatened party. This is on the assumption that, as a matter of law, what the threatening party claims to be
owing is not legally owing or there is no defence to the claim being waived by the threatened party. …
112.
 
Taken together, what 
Borrelli
 
v. 
Ting
 
and 
Progress Bulk Carriers
 
can be taken to have established is
that, in relation to a demand for a waiver by the threatened party of a claim against the threatening party, the
demand is unjustified, so that the lawful act economic threat is illegitimate where: first, the threatening party
has deliberately created, or increased, 
the threatened party’s vulnerability to the demand; and, secondly, the
‘bad faith demand’ requirement is satisfied (ie the threatening party does not genuinely believe that it has a
defence, and there is no defence, to the claim being waived). …
125.
 
…the ‘bad faith demand’ requirement is dependent on there being an existing legal right and duty
between the parties (whether contractual or otherwise) which provides a clear and certain standard against
which alleged bad faith of the threatening party can be assessed. Without that tie to an existing legal right and
duty, the ‘bad faith demand’ requirement loses its force as being underpinned by a workable standard of
dishonesty: the bad faith demand is concerned with either a dishonest assertion of an existing right or the
dishonest removal (by waiver) of an existing right. It also loses its force as providing a clear and certain means
of controlling the scope of lawful act economic duress and of distinguishing a demand that is unjustified from
one that is made in ordinary commercial bargaining.
Lord Hodge in turn ‘respectfully’ expressed his disagreement with Lord Burrows’ ‘bad
faith demand’ requirement and he rejected it for the following four reasons:
54. First, the demand for a waiver, to which A [the party making the demand] must know that it has no prior
entitlement, is in principle no different from the demand for a sum of money as a pre-condition for entering
into contractual relations in the context of a commercial negotiation … [where] Lord Burrows … accepts that
economic duress could not be made out in the latter circumstance. If the demand for money, which is supported
by the assertion of A’s bargaining power, does not give rise to a claim for duress, why should a demand for a
waiver of a valid claim which is backed up in the same way?
55.
 
Secondly, the absence of an identifiable principle to distinguish those two circumstances would increase
the undesirable uncertainty in commercial transactions. …
56.
 
Thirdly, and in any event, bad faith plays a wider role in lawful act duress than merely the absence of
belief in an entitlement to a pre-existing right or in the invalidity of a claim for which A seeks a waiver. In both
Borrelli
 
and 
The Cenk K
 
the conduct of A by which A applied pressure to B involved bad faith or behaviour
which was similarly reprehensible. … In both cases it was the combination of the probable or at least possible
validity of B’s claim against A combined with A’s behaviour of that nature which gave rise to the court’s
conclusion that the waiver had been obtained through the application of illegitimate pressure. In other words,
bad faith is potentially relevant both to the content of the demand and to the context in which A makes its
demand. To my mind, the two cases do not support Lord Burrows’ model.
57.
 
Fourthly, there is no support in either 
Borrelli
 
or 
The Cenk K
 
for the proposition that the mere assertion
of bargaining power, such as a lawful threat to terminate an existing contract or to reduce the supply of goods
under the contract in a way which the contract allowed, could without more amount to illegitimate pressure.
Lord Burrows considers that PIAC’s deliberate act of cutting its ticket allocation, thereby increasing Times
Travel’s vulnerability to its demand for a waiver of a claim that it was in breach of contract, was an act which
was beyond the mere exercise of monopoly power and would have amounted to illegitimate pressure if PIAC
had known that it had indeed broken its contract. I respectfully disagree and take a narrower view of the scope
of lawful act economic duress in this context. The reduction of the ticket allocation was a hard-nosed exercise of
monopoly power, which, in the absence of a doctrine of unequal bargaining power, could not by itself amount to
illegitimate pressure. Something more was needed, such as the reprehensible characteristics of the behaviour in
Borrelli
 
and 
The Cenk K
. 
…
 
As I have said … the scope for lawful act economic duress is extremely limited in the
sphere of commercial transactions.
Lord Burrows for his part responded to Lord Hodge’s criticism expressed at paragraph
[54] above in the following terms:
135. …Lord Hodge suggests, at para 54 of his judgment, that there is no principled difference between a demand
for payment, based on a bad faith demand, and a demand for payment as a pre-condition to entering into a
contract. With respect, the principled difference is that one involves bad faith, as I have defined it, but the other
does not. I have sought to make clear … that the ‘bad faith demand’ requirement is dependent on there being an
existing legal right and duty between the parties. To try to apply it outside that context would risk unduly
interfering with ordinary commercial bargaining; and it would deprive the requirement of its force as being
underpinned by a workable standard of dishonesty and as providing a clear and certain means of controlling the
scope of lawful act economic duress. It is also worth stressing that the root principle, to which one is seeking to
provide a clear guide, is that the demand is unjustified so that the lawful act economic threat is illegitimate. At
this stage in the law’s development, my strategy (see para 95 above) has been to set out a limited but clear and
workable boundary for what constitutes an unjustified demand—so that a lawful act economic threat is
illegitimate—in the context of the facts with which this case is concerned. Any incremental development of what
the common law treats as an unjustified demand in relation to lawful act economic duress can in the future
proceed cautiously, in the light of known facts, from that secure base.
18.4.3.2.4
 
Concluding Thoughts
This difference of view between Lord Hodge and Lord Burrows did not affect the
outcome of the appeal in 
Times Travel
. The Supreme Court was unanimous in its
conclusion that Times Travel had not made good its claim of economic duress. Lord
Hodge concluded (at [58]) that there were no findings that PIAC had used any
reprehensible means to manoeuvre Times Travel into a position of increased
vulnerability in order to exploit that vulnerability. While PIAC had used ‘hard-nosed
commercial negotiation that exploited PIAC’s position as a monopoly supplier’, it did
not, at least according to Lord Hodge, involve the use of ‘reprehensible means of
applying pressure’ which was evident in cases such as 
Borrelli
 
v. 
Ting
 
and 
Progress Bulk
Carrier
 
and there were also no findings that ‘PIAC acted in bad faith in making the
demands which it did’. For Lord Burrows, the claim of economic duress failed because
the threatened lawful act ‘was not coupled with a bad faith demand’ (see [138]) because
Times Travel had failed to establish bad faith by PIAC in that it had not established that
PIAC did not genuinely believe that it was entitled to withhold the unpaid commission.
But in other cases the difference of view may be critical. A case which illustrates this
potential difference is the decision of the Court of Appeal in 
CTN Cash and Carry Ltd
 
v.
Gallaher Ltd
 
[1994] 4 All ER 714. The plaintiffs agreed to buy a consignment of
cigarettes from the defendants. The defendants mistakenly delivered the cigarettes to
the plaintiffs’ Burnley warehouse instead of their Preston warehouse. When the mistake
was discovered, the defendants agreed to collect the cigarettes from Burnley and deliver
them to Preston. Before they could do so, the cigarettes were stolen from the Burnley
warehouse. The defendants insisted that the plaintiffs pay for the stolen cigarettes,
maintaining that the cigarettes were at the plaintiffs’ risk at the time they were stolen.
The trial judge found that the defendants believed in all good faith that the cigarettes
were at the plaintiffs’ risk, but that there was 
no legal basis for their belief. In
subsequent negotiations, the defendants made clear to the plaintiffs that, unless they
paid for the cigarettes, the defendants would withdraw the credit facilities which the
plaintiffs had hitherto enjoyed. The defendants were under no contractual obligation to
continue to provide the plaintiffs with credit. The plaintiffs paid the money and then
sought to recover the money on the ground that it had been paid under duress. The
plaintiffs’ claim failed.
The decision is clearly correct on its facts. But what would have been the position if the
facts had been the same except that the defendants made their demand in bad faith
because they did not genuinely believe that the plaintiffs owed the money which the
defendants claimed was due to them. Although it was not necessary to resolve this point
for the purposes of the appeal, Lord Burrows expressed the view that in such a case the
‘bad faith demand requirement’ would be met so that the demand would have been
unjustified thereby rendering the threat illegitimate (see [122]). Lord Hodge disagreed
(see [46]–[52]). Thus he concluded (at [59]) that if the defendants had not believed their
demand to be well founded, the Court of Appeal would not have been correct to reach
the conclusion that the payment had been made under duress
absent circumstances which involved the manoeuvring by Gallaher [the defendants] of CTN [the plaintiffs] into
a position of vulnerability by means which involved bad faith or were similarly reprehensible and went beyond
the use of its position as a monopoly supplier, or which brought the transaction within the ambit of the
equitable doctrine of unconscionable transactions.
The difficulty with the latter passage, however, is the one raised by Lord Burrows,
namely identifying precisely the scope of the principle laid down by Lord Hodge and the
fear that it will generate uncertainty. While the principle itself does lack precision, it
may be that it will not generate a great deal of uncertainty in practice because lower
courts will pick up on the emphasis placed by the Supreme Court on the exceptional
nature of a lawful act duress claim and resist the invitation to find that the case before
them falls within that exception. An indication that this might be the outcome can be
gleaned from the judgment of Mr Richard Salter QC in 
Heritage Travel and Tourism
Ltd
 
v. 
Windhorst
 
[2021] EWHC 2380 (Comm), [34.3.3] where he stated:
In the commercial context, it is only in extremely limited circumstances that the law will regard a threat to act
lawfully as illegitimate or unconscionable. It is not ordinarily duress to threaten to do that which one has a right
to do, for instance to refuse to enter into a contract or to terminate a contract lawfully. The pursuit of
commercial self-interest is justified in commercial bargaining. The pressure applied by a negotiating party
(unless it involves a threat to act unlawfully) will very rarely come up to the standard of illegitimate pressure or
unconscionable conduct. It will therefore be a rare circumstance in which a court will find lawful act duress in
the context of commercial negotiation.
Although the Supreme Court has not closed the door entirely on the doctrine of lawful
act duress, it would appear likely that the courts will be very slow to open the door, in
which case it may be some time before we see a successful claim of lawful act duress, at
least in a contract entered into between two commercial parties.
FURTHER READING
B
EATSON
, J
, ‘Duress, Restitution and Contract Modification’ in 
J B
EATSON
, 
The Use
and Abuse of Unjust Enrichment
 
(Oxford University Press, 1990), p. 95.
B
IRKS
, P
, ‘The Travails of Duress’ [1990] 
LMCLQ
 
342.
M
C
K
ENDRICK
, E
, ‘The Further Travails of Duress’ in 
A B
URROWS
 
AND
 
L
ORD
 R
ODGER
 
OF
E
ARLSFERRY
 
(eds), 
Mapping the Law: Essays in Memory of Peter Birks
 
(Oxford
University Press, 2006), p. 181.
S
MITH
, S
, ‘Contracting Under Pressure: A Theory of Duress’ [1997] 
CLJ
 
343.
Test your knowledge by trying this chapter’s 
Multiple Choice
Questions
1.
2.
3.
4.
19
Undue Influence
Central Issues
Undue influence is a creature of equity and assumes many different
forms. The principal forms consist of actual undue influence and
presumed undue influence.
Actual undue influence has many similarities with common law
duress. It generally consists of the application of illegitimate pressure
but would appear to extend to other forms of wrongdoing, such as
‘overreaching’ and ‘cheating’.
Cases of presumed undue influence are more difficult to classify. The
essential idea is that one party has taken advantage of a relationship
of trust and confidence to the substantial detriment of the party who
has reposed the trust and confidence in him. The courts have
experienced considerable difficulty in identifying the circumstances
which have the effect of triggering the operation of the presumption.
There appear to be two principal elements: (i) there must be a
relationship of sufficient trust and confidence between the parties and
(ii) the transaction that has taken place between the parties must not
be explicable in terms of the ordinary motives on which ordinary
people act. The presumption is a rebuttable one. It can be rebutted by
showing that entry into the transaction was the result of the free
exercise of independent will by the party seeking to set aside the
transaction.
The courts have generally been reluctant to attempt a comprehensive
definition of undue influence. They tend to emphasize the facts and
circumstances of the individual case. Thus relationships are ‘infinitely
various’ and no description of the relevant factors is ‘perfect’ or ‘all
embracing’. The emphasis is not only on ‘influence’ but on the ‘abuse’
or the ‘misuse’ of that influence. In this sense undue influence has
been said to have a connotation of impropriety. But it may be
impropriety in an attenuated form, in that it may take the form of failing
to ensure that the claimant has access to independent advice.
19.1
 
Introduction
Cases of alleged undue influence have caused considerable difficulties for the courts in
recent years. The difficulties relate, not to the existence of the doctrine, but to its scope
and its relationship with other doctrines, particularly duress (on which see 
Chapter 18
)
and other cases in which courts have intervened to protect the vulnerable or those who
have been exploited (on which see 
Chapter 20
). The very words ‘undue influence’ give
rise to difficulty. What does ‘undue’ mean? Does it mean ‘too much’, ‘illegitimate’ (in the
sense in which that word is used in the context of duress), or ‘unconscionable’?
‘Influence’ is not much better. Does it mean ‘pressure’, ‘domination’, ‘exploitation’,
‘dependence’, or something else? The courts have, until recently, made considerable use
of a ‘presumption’ of undue influence. But what was it that was being presumed? Was it
illegitimate pressure, exploitation, or excessive dependence? One of the principal issues
of controversy has been whether the focus of undue influence is upon the conduct of the
defendant, the state of mind of the claimant, or upon both elements. This controversy
remains unresolved. In some cases (such as 
R
 
v. 
Attorney-General for England and
Wales
 
[2003] UKPC 22, 
19.4.1
, and 
National Commercial Bank (Jamaica) Ltd
 
v. 
Hew
[2003] UKPC 51, 
19.4.2
) strong emphasis has been placed on the need for some form of
wrongdoing on the part of the defendant, whereas in other cases (see, for example,
Pesticcio
 
v. 
Huet
 
[2004] EWCA Civ 372, [2004] All ER (D) 36 (Apr), 
19.4.3
) the courts
have stated that a finding of undue influence does not require any wrongdoing on the
part of the defendant.
The traditional approach to undue influence is to distinguish between actual and
presumed undue influence (although the distinction between the two categories would
seem to be less rigid than previously and it may be that they represent no more than the
two principal methods by which undue influence may be proved). An example of actual
undue influence is provided by the decision of the House of Lords in 
Williams
 
v. 
Bayley
(1866) LR 1 HL 200. The plaintiff’s son gave the defendant bankers promissory notes
upon which he had forged the plaintiff’s signature. When the defendants discovered
what had taken place they met with the plaintiff and during the course of the meeting
they informed him that they had it within their power to prosecute his son. A solicitor
was present with the plaintiff during the meeting but he left in protest when the plaintiff
was asked to meet his son’s debts. The plaintiff then agreed to enter into a mortgage to
pay off the debts of his son, which he later sought to set aside. The House of Lords held
that the plaintiff was entitled to set aside the mortgage in equity. Lord Chelmsford
stated (at p. 214) that the agreement had been ‘extorted from the father by undue
pressure’. In so far as actual undue influence is based on the application of ‘undue
pressure’ it would appear to be the equitable counterpart of common law duress (see, for
example, 
R
 
v. 
Attorney-General for England and Wales
 
[2003] UKPC 22, 
19.4.1
) and it
has been observed that today 
Williams
 
would be seen as an example of lawful act duress
(
Pakistan International Airline Corporation
 
v. 
Times Travel (UK) Ltd
 
[2021] UKSC 40,
[2021] 3 WLR 727, [9] and [90]). But there is no formal necessity to plead the case as
one of duress; it could, as in 
Williams
 
itself, still be pleaded as a case of actual undue
influence (
Libyan Investment Authority
 
v. 
Goldman Sachs International
 
[2016] EWHC
2530 (Ch), [136]). It is also important to keep in mind that actual undue influence may
extend beyond the application of illegitimate pressure and encompass subtler forms of
impropriety than those that currently fall within the scope of common law duress. Given
the potentially broader reach of actual undue influence (see 
Royal Bank of Scotland plc
v. 
Etridge (No 2)
 
[2001] UKHL 44, [2002] 2 AC 773, [8], [93], and [103]), 
19.3
), it
would appear preferable to retain the existing category of actual undue influence than
seek to assimilate it entirely within common law duress.
Cases of presumed undue influence are even more difficult. There are generally three
elements to a case of presumed undue influence. First, there must have been a
relationship of trust and confidence between the parties. Prior to the decision of the
House of Lords in 
Royal Bank of Scotland plc
 
v. 
Etridge (No 2)
 
[2001] UKHL 44,
[2002] 2 AC 773 (
19.3
) it was customary to sub-divide the cases into two groups. The
first group consisted of a class of relationships in which the law presumed that one party
was in a position to exercise influence or dominion over the other. These relationships
included parent and child, guardian and ward, doctor and patient, solicitor and client,
trustee and beneficiary, and religious adviser and disciple. The second group consisted
of cases in which the claimant proved that, on the facts, a relationship of trust and
confidence existed between the parties. Cases in this second group were inevitably fact
specific because they depended upon a finding that, 
in the particular case
, a
relationship of trust and confidence existed between the parties. However the future of
this second category is, at best, doubtful after the decision of the House of Lords in
Etridge
 
(see 
19.3
).
The second element in a presumed undue influence case is that there must be something
about the transaction which ‘calls for an explanation’. This requirement has been
expressed in different ways. In 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
 
(1887) 36 Ch D 145 (
19.3
) Lindley LJ
stated that the gift must have been ‘so large as not to be reasonably accounted for on the
ground of friendship, relationship, charity, or other ordinary motives on which ordinary
men act’. In 
National Westminster Bank plc
 
v. 
Morgan
 
[1985] AC 686 Lord Scarman
stated that the transaction must be ‘manifestly disadvantageous’ to the person seeking to
set it aside. As a result of the decision of the House of Lords in 
Etridge
 
(
19.3
) it would
appear that the former test is the one that is to be applied in future cases.
These two elements between them suffice to trigger the presumption of undue influence.
The court must then consider whether the presumption has been rebutted. This is the
third element in a presumed undue influence claim. The factors relevant to the rebuttal
of the presumption have been summarized (Treitel, 
The Law of Contract
 
(15th edn,
Sweet & Maxwell, 2020, edited by Edwin Peel), para 10–030) as follows:
The presumption of undue influence is rebutted if the party benefiting from the transaction (A) shows that it
was ‘the free exercise of independent will’. The most usual way of doing this is to show that the other party (B)
had independent advice before entering into the transaction. But the mere fact that independent advice was
given will not of itself save the transaction. The advice must be competent and based on knowledge of all the
relevant facts. It has been suggested that the independent adviser must also approve the transaction, and that
his advice must be followed. This may be necessary where the influence is particularly strong, or where a very
large gift is made; but it is not necessary in every case. There is indeed no invariable rule that independent
advice is necessary to save the transaction; but A would lack elementary prudence if he did not ensure that such
advice was given.
The presumption will not be rebutted by demonstrating that there was a reasonable
explanation for the transaction (
Smith
 
v. 
Cooper
 
[2010] EWCA Civ 722, [2010] 2 FCR
551). It is necessary to go further and prove that the transaction was a result of the
exercise by the claimant of ‘full, free and informed thought’ (
Hackett
 
v. 
Crown
Prosecution Service
 
[2011] EWHC 1170 (Admin), [2011] All ER (D) 112 (May)).
A case in which the presumption of undue influence was not rebutted is 
Hammond
 
v.
Osborn
 
[2002] EWCA Civ 885. A 74-year-old man, Mr Pritler, who was in poor health,
realized his investments and wrote out four cheques to a total value of £297,000 in
favour of the defendant, Mrs Osborn, who had assumed the principal role in caring for
him. This sum represented ‘nearly 91.6% of his liquid assets’. Further, the consequence
of the realization of his investments in this way was that ‘he became prospectively liable
for charges for capital gains tax and higher rate tax’ amounting to almost £50,000. On
the death of Mr Pritler his family sought to set aside the gifts to the defendant. The
defendant conceded that there was a relationship of trust and confidence between
herself and Mr Pritler and that the gift was so large as to trigger the operation of the
presumption. The trial judge held that the presumption had been rebutted because he
was satisfied that the donor made the gift ‘only after full, free and informed thought
about it’. The Court of Appeal disagreed and held that the presumption had not been
rebutted. Sir Martin Nourse stated:
28. Here Mr Pritler received no advice at all, whether independent or of any other kind. I am prepared to
assume that there could be a case, perhaps there has been a case, where the nature and effect of the gift was so
fully explained to the donor by the donee as to satisfy the test. But there was nothing of that sort here. Mrs
Osborn did not draw Mr Pritler’s attention to the size of the gift, nor to the proportion of his liquid assets that it
represented, nor to the relatively small amount that was left to him …
29.
 
Although Mr Pritler knew that he was making a gift to Mrs Osborn and must have known that it was a
substantial gift, he was never told its size, even in approximate terms. So he did not know the nature of the gift.
Even more important, he was not told of its effect. … It is true that he was left with some £27,000 in cash, his
house valued at about £130,000 and an annual income of about £14,000 net. But no consideration was given as
to whether those assets would be sufficient to satisfy his future needs. Nor was any consideration given to the
extremely serious fiscal consequences of the realisation of his investments. Had he lived, as he was expected to,
he would have become liable to the Inland Revenue for nearly £50,000, with not much more than half that
amount in cash to meet the liability. It was no answer for Mrs Osborn to say, as she consistently did, that she
treated the money as still belonging to Mr Pritler and would never have left him in need. It is impossible to say
that the gift was made by Mr Pritler only after full, free and informed thought about it.
30.
 
The principal argument of Mr McCue [counsel for the defendant] in this court was that the presumption
is rebutted if it is shown that the conduct of the donee has been unimpeachable, or at any rate that there has
been nothing sinister in it. Such, he argued, had been the conduct of Mrs Osborn in this case …
32.
 
Even if it is correct to say that Mrs Osborn’s conduct was unimpeachable and that there was nothing
sinister in it, that would be no answer to an application of the presumption. As Cotton LJ said in 
Allcard
 
v.
Skinner
 
[
19.3
], the court does not interfere on the ground that any wrongful act has in fact been committed by
the donee but on the ground of public policy, which requires it to be affirmatively established that the donor’s
trust and confidence in the donee has not been betrayed or abused. In any event, I am unable to subscribe to Mr
McCue’s suggested view of Mrs Osborn’s conduct. The judge’s finding that her silence and deliberate falsehoods
after Mr Pritler’s death were caused by Mr Osborn ordering her to keep her mouth shut and by her fear of him,
while it may to a large extent excuse her, does not make her conduct unimpeachable nor does it relieve it of its
sinister appearance. What it shows is that there was still an attempted cover up, but that Mr Osborn was
involved in it as well as Mrs Osborn.
33.
 
I cannot agree with the judge’s view of this question. The presumption has not been rebutted and the
gift must be set aside. I would therefore allow Mrs Hammond’s appeal.
19.2
 
Three-Party Cases
Recent judicial exposition of undue influence has tended to take place in the context of
three-party cases rather than two-party cases, that is to say cases in which a wrong has
been committed by a third party and not the defendant. The word ‘wrong’ has been used
deliberately because one of the leading cases, 
Barclays Bank plc
 
v. 
O’Brien
 
[1994] 1 AC
180, did not, in the event, involve undue influence at all: it was a misrepresentation case.
The facts of 
Barclays Bank plc
 
v. 
O’Brien
 
were as follows. Mr O’Brien negotiated an
overdraft with Barclays for a company in which he had an interest. It was agreed that Mr
O’Brien would guarantee the company’s indebtedness and that his liability would, in
turn, be secured by a second charge on the matrimonial home. The bank manager asked
the branch at which the security documents were to be signed to ensure that the
O’Briens were ‘fully aware of the nature of the documentation to be signed and advised
that if they are in any doubt they should contact their solicitor before signing’. These
instructions were not complied with and Mrs O’Brien was given no explanation of the
effect of the documents before she signed them, nor was she advised of the need to take
independent advice. When the company’s indebtedness rose to £154,000, the bank
demanded that Mr O’Brien honour the guarantee. When he failed to do so, the bank
sought to enforce the charge which Mrs O’Brien had signed and to obtain possession of
the house. Mrs O’Brien sought to defend the claim on the ground that she had been
induced to sign the charge by the undue influence of her husband and by his
misrepresentation that the charge was limited to £60,000 and that its duration was to
be confined to a short period of time. The claim based on undue influence was rejected
in the Court of Appeal and was not pursued in the House of Lords, where the claim to
set aside the transaction was based on the misrepresentation of Mr O’Brien, of which it
was argued, in the event successfully, that the bank had constructive notice so that it
could not enforce the charge against Mrs O’Brien.
There were three steps to the reasoning of the House of Lords in 
O’Brien
. First Mrs
O’Brien had to demonstrate that she was entitled to set aside ‘the transaction’ as against
her husband. It is here that undue influence enters the arena as one of the possible
grounds on which a wife may be entitled to set aside a transaction against her husband.
The other ground, and the ground that was actually in issue in 
O’Brien
, was
misrepresentation. Secondly, the bank must have been put on notice of the possibility of
wrongdoing on the part of the husband. Thirdly, once put on notice, the bank had to
take certain steps to ensure that the agreement of the wife to the charge was properly
obtained. It is not necessary to enter into the details of the second and third elements of
this analysis because they have largely been overtaken by the decision of the House of
Lords in 
Etridge
. It suffices for the present purpose to note that the basis on which the
claimant was held to be entitled to set aside the charge as against the defendant bank
was not that the bank had committed a wrong but simply that it had notice that
someone else had committed a wrong and had failed to take sufficient steps to ensure
that the claimant was given adequate advice before deciding whether or not to enter into
the transaction.
The leading case on undue influence is now the decision of the House of Lords in 
Royal
Bank of Scotland plc
 
v. 
Etridge (No 2)
 
[2001] UKHL 44, [2002] 2 AC 773 (
19.3
). It is a
three-party case and it re-examines 
Barclays Bank
 
v. 
O’Brien
. It is, however, important
to see the operation of undue influence at work in a standard two-party case. Thus we
shall commence our analysis with the case of 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
 
(1887) 36 Ch D 145,
which, in the words of Lord Nicholls in 
Etridge
 
([8]
  
), is ‘a case well known to every law
student’. We shall then turn to 
Etridge
 
itself.
19.3
 
Two Leading Cases
ALLCARD V. SKINNER
(1887) 36 Ch D 145, Court of Appeal
In 1868, the plaintiff was introduced by her ‘spiritual director and confessor’, Rev D
Nihill, to the defendant, who was the lady superior of the sisterhood of St Mary at
the Cross. In July of the same year, the plaintiff became an associate of the
sisterhood, and at that time promised to devote her property to the service of the
poor. She subsequently became a postulant, and then a novice, before, in 1871,
she joined the sisterhood. On becoming a sister the plaintiff became subject to the
rules of the sisterhood. These rules demanded her implicit obedience to the lady
superior, whose voice was stated to be ‘the voice of God’, and they also stated that
she must not ‘seek advice of any entern without the Superior’s leave’. She also
took a vow of poverty, which required her to give away all her property. Although
there was no requirement that she give her property to the sisterhood, it was found
that there was an expectation to that effect. The plaintiff left the sisterhood in 1879
and revoked her will under which she had left her property to the sisterhood. In
1885 the plaintiff sought to recover certain items of property which she had
transferred to the sisterhood. Her claim was rejected by the Court of Appeal,
affirming the decision of Kekewich J. Although she was able to show that the
property had been transferred while she was under the undue influence of the
defendant, it was held, Cotton LJ dissenting on this point, that her claim was
barred by virtue of her delay after leaving the sisterhood in bringing proceedings
(and for this purpose the majority found it unnecessary to decide whether the
appropriate label for the defence was acquiescence, laches, or affirmation). The
extracts which follow are concerned solely with the ground on which the plaintiff
was entitled to bring her claim and not with the scope of the defences.
Cotton LJ
The question is—Does the case fall within the principles laid down by the decisions
of the Court of Chancery in setting aside voluntary gifts executed by parties who at
the time were under such influence as, in the opinion of the Court, enabled the
donor afterwards to set the gift aside? These decisions may be divided into two
classes—First, where the Court has been satisfied that the gift was the result of
influence expressly used by the donee for the purpose; second, where the
relations between the donor and donee have at or shortly before the execution of
the gift been such as to raise a presumption that the donee had influence over the
donor. In such a case the Court sets aside the voluntary gift, unless it is proved
that in fact the gift was the spontaneous act of the donor acting under
circumstances which enabled him to exercise an independent will and which
justifies the Court in holding that the gift was the result of a free exercise of the
donor’s will. The first class of cases may be considered as depending on the
principle that no one shall be allowed to retain any benefit arising from his own
fraud or wrongful act. In the second class of cases the Court interferes, not on the
ground that any wrongful act has in fact been committed by the donee, but on the
ground of public policy, and to prevent the relations which existed between the
parties and the influence arising therefrom being abused …
The question is whether the case comes within the principle of the second
class, and I am of opinion that it does. At the time of the gift the Plaintiff was a
professed sister, and, as 
such, bound to render absolute submission to the
Defendant as superior of the sisterhood. She had no power to obtain independent
advice, she was in such a position that she could not freely exercise her own will
as to the disposal of her property, and she must be considered as being … ‘not, in
the largest and amplest sense of the term—not, in mind as well as person—an
entirely free agent’. … In my opinion, even if there were evidence that she had,
before she joined the sisterhood, advice on the question of how she should deal
with her property, that would not be sufficient. The question is, I think, whether at
the time when she executed the transfer she was under such influences as to
prevent the gift being considered as that of one free to determine what should be
done with her property …
Lindley LJ
I have examined the evidence with care in order to see whether any pressure was
put upon the Plaintiff in order to induce her to give her property to the sisterhood,
or whether any deception was practised upon her, or whether any unfair advantage
was taken of her, or whether any of her money was applied otherwise than bona
fide for the objects of the sisterhood, or for any purpose which the Plaintiff could
disapprove. The result of the evidence convinces me that no pressure, except the
inevitable pressure of the vows and rules, was brought to bear on the Plaintiff; that
no deception was practised upon her; that no unfair advantage was taken of her;
that none of her money was obtained or applied for any purpose other than the
legitimate objects of the sisterhood. … The real truth is that the Plaintiff gave away
her property as a matter of course, and without seriously thinking of the
consequences to herself. She had devoted herself and her fortune to the
sisterhood, and it never occurred to her that she should ever wish to leave the
sisterhood or desire to have her money back. In giving away her property as she
did she was merely acting up to her promise and vow and the rule of the
sisterhood, and to the standard of duty which she had erected for herself under the
influences and circumstances already stated …
There is no authority whatever for saying that her gifts were invalid at law. It is
to the doctrines of equity, then, that recourse must be had to invalidate such gifts, if
they are to be invalidated. The doctrine relied upon by the Appellant is the doctrine
of undue influence expounded and enforced in 
Huguenin
 
v. 
Baseley
 
(1807) 14 Ves
273 and other cases of that class. These cases may be subdivided into two
groups, which, however, often overlap.
First, there are the cases in which there has been some unfair and improper
conduct, some coercion from outside, some overreaching, some form of cheating,
and generally, though not always, some personal advantage obtained by a donee
placed in some close and confidential relation to the donor. … The evidence does
not bring this case within this group.
The second group consists of cases in which the position of the donor to the
donee has been such that it has been the duty of the donee to advise the donor, or
even to manage his property for him. In such cases the Court throws upon the
donee the burden of proving that he has not abused his position, and of proving
that the gift made to him has not been brought about by any undue influence on
his part. In this class of cases it has been considered necessary to shew that the
donor had independent advice, and was removed from the influence of the donee
when the gift to him was made …
I have not been able to find any case in which a gift has been set aside on the
ground of undue influence which does not fall within one or other or both of the
groups above mentioned. Nor can I find any authority which actually covers the
present case. But it does not follow that it is not reached by the principle on which
the Court has proceeded in dealing with the cases which have already called for
decision. They illustrate but do not limit the principle applied to them.
The principle must be examined. What then is the principle? Is it that it is right
and expedient to save persons from the consequences of their own folly? or is it
that it is right and expedient to save them from being victimised by other people?
In my opinion the doctrine of undue influence is founded upon the second of these
two principles. Courts of Equity have never set aside gifts on the ground of the
folly, imprudence, or want of foresight on the part of donors. The Courts have
always repudiated any such jurisdiction. 
Huguenin
 
v. 
Baseley
 
(1807) 14 Ves 273 is
itself a clear authority to this effect. It would obviously be to encourage folly,
recklessness, extravagance and vice if persons could get back property which they
foolishly made away with, whether by giving it to charitable institutions or by
bestowing it on less worthy objects. On the other hand, to protect people from
being forced, tricked or misled in any way by others into parting with their property
is one of the most legitimate objects of all laws; and the equitable doctrine of
undue influence has grown out of and been developed by the necessity of
grappling with insidious forms of spiritual tyranny and with the infinite varieties of
fraud.
As no Court has ever attempted to define fraud so no Court has ever attempted
to define undue influence, which includes one of its many varieties. The undue
influence which Courts of Equity endeavour to defeat is the undue influence of one
person over another; not the influence of enthusiasm on the enthusiast who is
carried away by it, unless indeed such enthusiasm is itself the result of external
undue influence. But the influence of one mind over another is very subtle, and of
all influences religious influence is the most dangerous and the most powerful, and
to counteract it Courts of Equity have gone very far … In this particular case I
cannot find any proof that any gift made by the Plaintiff was the result of any actual
exercise of power or influence on the part of the lady superior or of Mr Nihill, apart
from the influence necessarily incidental to their position in the sisterhood.
Everything that the Plaintiff did is in my opinion referable to her own willing
submission to the vows she took and to the rules which she approved, and to her
own enthusiastic devotion to the life and work of the sisterhood. …
Nevertheless, consider the position in which the Plaintiff had placed herself.
She had vowed poverty and obedience, and she was not at liberty to consult
externs without the leave of her superior. She was not a person who treated her
vows lightly; she was deeply religious and felt bound by her promise, by her vows,
and by the rules of the sisterhood. She was absolutely in the power of the lady
superior and Mr Nihill. A gift made by her under these circumstances to the lady
superior cannot in my opinion be retained by the donee. The equitable title of the
donee is imperfect by reason of the influence inevitably resulting from her position,
and which influence experience has taught the Courts to regard as undue.
Whatever doubt I might have had on this point if there had been no rule against
consulting externs, that rule in my judgment turns the scale against the Defendant.
In the face of that rule the gifts made to the sisterhood cannot be supported in the
absence of proof that the Plaintiff could have obtained independent advice if she
wished for it, and that she knew that she would have been allowed to obtain such
advice if she had desired to do so. I doubt whether the gifts could have been
supported if such proof had been given, unless there was also proof that she was
free to act on the advice which might be given to her. But the rule itself is so
oppressive and so easily abused that any person subject to it is in my opinion
brought within the class of those whom it is the duty of the Court to protect from
possible imposition. The gifts cannot be supported without proof of more freedom
in fact than the Plaintiff can be supposed to have actually enjoyed.
Where a gift is made to a person standing in a confidential relation to the donor,
the Court will not set aside the gift if of a small amount simply on the ground that
the donor had no 
independent advice. In such a case, some proof of the exercise
of the influence of the donee must be given. The mere existence of such influence
is not enough in such a case; … But if the gift is so large as not to be reasonably
accounted for on the ground of friendship, relationship, charity, or other ordinary
motives on which ordinary men act, the burden is upon the donee to support the
gift … in this case there was in fact no unfair or undue influence brought to bear
upon the Plaintiff other than such as inevitably resulted from the training she had
received, the promise she had made, the vows she had taken, and the rules to
which she had submitted herself. But her gifts were in fact made under a pressure
which, whilst it lasted, the Plaintiff could not resist, and were not, in my opinion,
past recall when that pressure was removed. When the Plaintiff emancipated
herself from the spell by which she was bound, she was entitled to invoke the aid
of the Court in order to obtain the restitution from the Defendant of so much of the
Plaintiff’s property as had not been spent in accordance with the wishes of the
Plaintiff, but remained in the hands of the Defendant.
Bowen LJ
… it is of essential importance to keep quite distinct two things which in their
nature seem to me to be different—the rights of the donor, and the duties of the
donee. … As to the rights of the donor in a case like the present I entertain no
doubt. … In the present instance there was no duress, no incompetency, no want
of mental power on the part of the donor. It seems to me that, so far as regards her
rights, she had the absolute right to deal with her property as she chose. Passing
next to the duties of the donee, … it is plain that equity will not allow a person who
exercises or enjoys a dominant religious influence over another to benefit directly
or indirectly by the gifts which the donor makes under or in consequence of such
influence, unless it is shewn that the donor, at the time of making the gift, was
allowed full and free opportunity for counsel and advice outside—the means of
considering his or her worldly position and exercising an independent will about it.
This is not a limitation placed on the action of the donor; it is a fetter placed upon
the conscience of the recipient of the gift, and one which arises out of public policy
and fair play … [The] Plaintiff … had vowed in the most sacred and solemn way
absolute and implicit obedience to the will of the Defendant, her superior, and she
was bound altogether to neglect the advice of externs—not to consult those
outside the convent … the Plaintiff, so long as she was fettered by this vow—so
long as she was under the dominant influence of this religious feeling—was a
person entitled to the protection of the rule. Now, was the Defendant bound by this
rule? I acquit her most entirely of all selfish feeling in the matter. I can see no sort
of wrongful desire to appropriate to herself any worldly benefit from the gift; but,
nevertheless, she was a person who benefited by it so far as the disposition of the
property was concerned, although, no doubt, she meant to use it in conformity with
the rules of the institution, and did so use it.
Commentary
Allcard
 
is an interesting case for a number of reasons. First, the judges distinguish
between actual and presumed undue influence. 
Allcard
 
itself is a case of presumed
undue influence. Nevertheless, the judges did give brief consideration to the scope of
actual undue influence. Thus Lindley LJ stated that actual undue influence extends to
cases of ‘overreaching’ and ‘cheating’. Secondly, it is not easy to identify the basis upon
which the Court of Appeal concluded that this was a case of presumed undue influence.
There are passages from the 
judgment of Lindley LJ which suggest that ‘victimization’ is
the basis of a finding of undue influence. This suggests that the search is for some
wrongdoing on the part of the defendant. But this rationalization is difficult to reconcile
with his conclusion that there was nothing to suggest that any gift made by the plaintiff
was the result of the actual exercise of power or influence by the Mother Superior. This
tends to suggest that the basis for the finding that this was a case of presumed undue
influence had more to do with the position of the plaintiff than the behaviour of the
defendant (see further 
19.4.2
). Thus Professors Birks and Chin (‘On the Nature of Undue
Influence’ in J Beatson and D Friedmann (eds), 
Good Faith and Fault in Contract Law
(Oxford University Press, 1995), at p. 68) suggest that:
in presuming the undue influence the Court of Appeal was not presuming recourse to threats, express or
implied, either by the Mother Superior or by the clergyman who had been the co-founder of the convent. The
plaintiff had been under a spell compounded of her enthusiasm for the sisterhood and devotion to its rules,
which included an obligation to seek advice only within the order. Her weakness consisted in her impaired
capacity 
vis-à-vis
 
the head of the order to judge her own best interests. She was excessively dependent or, if
‘dependent’ is a shade wrong, she was excessively spell-bound. Either way, her autonomy was impaired to an
exceptional degree.
But a plaintiff- or claimant-sided version of 
Allcard
 
is not without its own difficulties. As
Professor Chen-Wishart has observed ([2006] 
Current Legal Problems
 
231, 238),
Allcard
 
cannot ‘realistically support a claimant-sided story’ given that there was ‘ample
finding that the nun knew what was expected of her before she joined the sisterhood’
and that ‘everything she did was referable to her own willing submission and
enthusiastic devotion to the life and work of the sisterhood’. We may view the plaintiff as
being misguided in her devotion to the sisterhood but should the law characterize her as
someone who was unable to manage her own affairs (given that any inability appeared
to relate only to her dealings with the sisterhood) or patronisingly take away her
freedom to dispose of her property as she sees fit?
Thirdly, it would appear that the critical factor was that the plaintiff did not have access
to external, independent advice. In the absence of such independent advice there was
nothing to free the plaintiff from her overwhelming sense that she was bound to give
away all her property. Had she had independent advice, been free to act on it, and had
nevertheless decided to give away her property, it is unlikely that the Court of Appeal
would have held that the transaction could be set aside. The key element here may not
be the giving of independent advice (since the plaintiff would in all probability not have
accepted the advice in the light of her devotion to the sisterhood) but of proof that she
was free to act on that advice. But here we encounter the problem of how to demonstrate
that she was free to act on any independent advice that she was given.
ROYAL BANK OF SCOTLAND PLC V. ETRIDGE (NO 2)
[2001] UKHL 44, [2002] 2 AC 773, House of Lords
The House of Lords heard eight appeals. Each case arose out of a transaction in
which a wife charged her interest in her home in favour of a bank as security for
her husband’s indebtedness or the indebtedness of a company through which he
carried on business. In seven of the appeals the bank sought to enforce the charge
signed by the wife. The wife raised a 
defence that the bank was on notice that her
concurrence in the transaction had been procured by her husband’s undue
influence. In the eighth appeal the wife claimed damages from a solicitor who
advised her before she entered into a guarantee obligation under the undue
influence of her husband. Given the range of cases before the House of Lords it is
not possible to include within the extracts the application of the legal principles to
the facts of the cases. In the extracts that follow, the excerpts are confined to the
analysis employed by their Lordships of undue influence itself. Their analysis of the
other issues is noted in the commentary, and further extracts from the speech of
Lord Nicholls are to be found in the 
online resources
 
which support this book.
Lord Bingham of Cornhill
3. … While the opinions of Lord Nicholls and Lord Scott show some difference of
expression and approach, I do not myself discern any significant difference of legal
principle applicable to these cases, and I agree with both opinions. But if I am
wrong and such differences exist, it is plain that the opinion of Lord Nicholls
commands the unqualified support of all members of the House.
Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead
Undue influence
6. The issues raised by these appeals make it necessary to go back to first
principles. Undue influence is one of the grounds of relief developed by the courts
of equity as a court of conscience. The objective is to ensure that the influence of
one person over another is not abused. In everyday life people constantly seek to
influence the decisions of others. They seek to persuade those with whom they are
dealing to enter into transactions, whether great or small. The law has set limits to
the means properly employable for this purpose. To this end the common law
developed a principle of duress. Originally this was narrow in its scope, restricted
to the more blatant forms of physical coercion, such as personal violence.
7.
 
Here, as elsewhere in the law, equity supplemented the common law. Equity
extended the reach of the law to other unacceptable forms of persuasion. The law
will investigate the manner in which the intention to enter into the transaction was
secured: ‘how the intention was produced’, in the oft repeated words of Lord Eldon
LC, from as long ago as 1807 (
Huguenin
 
v. 
Baseley
 
14 Ves 273, 300). If the
intention was produced by an unacceptable means, the law will not permit the
transaction to stand. The means used is regarded as an exercise of improper or
‘undue’ influence, and hence unacceptable, whenever the consent thus procured
ought not fairly to be treated as the expression of a person’s free will. It is
impossible to be more precise or definitive. The circumstances in which one
person acquires influence over another, and the manner in which influence may be
exercised, vary too widely to permit of any more specific criterion.
8.
 
Equity identified broadly two forms of unacceptable conduct. The first
comprises overt acts of improper pressure or coercion such as unlawful threats.
Today there is much overlap with the principle of duress as this principle has
subsequently developed. The second form arises out of a relationship between two
persons where one has acquired over another a measure of influence, or
ascendancy, of which the ascendant person then takes unfair advantage …
9.
 
In cases of this latter nature the influence one person has over another
provides scope for misuse without any specific overt acts of persuasion. The
relationship between two 
individuals may be such that, without more, one of them
is disposed to agree a course of action proposed by the other. Typically this occurs
when one person places trust in another to look after his affairs and interests, and
the latter betrays this trust by preferring his own interests. He abuses the influence
he has acquired. In 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
 
(1887) 36 Ch D 145, a case well known to
every law student, Lindley LJ, at p. 181, described this class of cases as those in
which it was the duty of one party to advise the other or to manage his property for
him …
10.
 
The law has long recognised the need to prevent abuse of influence in
these ‘relationship’ cases despite the absence of evidence of overt acts of
persuasive conduct. The types of relationship, such as parent and child, in which
this principle falls to be applied cannot be listed exhaustively. Relationships are
infinitely various. Sir Guenter Treitel QC has rightly noted that the question is
whether one party has reposed sufficient trust and confidence in the other, rather
than whether the relationship between the parties belongs to a particular type: see
Treitel, 
The Law of Contract
, 10th edn (1999), pp. 380–381. For example, the
relation of banker and customer will not normally meet this criterion, but
exceptionally it may: see 
National Westminster Bank plc
 
v. 
Morgan
 
[1985] AC 686,
707–709.
11.
 
Even this test is not comprehensive. The principle is not confined to cases
of abuse of trust and confidence. It also includes, for instance, cases where a
vulnerable person has been exploited. Indeed, there is no single touchstone for
determining whether the principle is applicable. Several expressions have been
used in an endeavour to encapsulate the essence: trust and confidence, reliance,
dependence or vulnerability on the one hand and ascendancy, domination or
control on the other. None of these descriptions is perfect. None is all embracing.
Each has its proper place.
12.
 
In 
CIBC Mortgages plc
 
v. 
Pitt
 
[1994] 1 AC 200 your Lordships’ House
decided that in cases of undue influence disadvantage is not a necessary
ingredient of the cause of action. It is not essential that the transaction should be
disadvantageous to the pressurised or influenced person, either in financial terms
or in any other way. However, in the nature of things, questions of undue influence
will not usually arise, and the exercise of undue influence is unlikely to occur,
where the transaction is innocuous. The issue is likely to arise only when, in some
respect, the transaction was disadvantageous either from the outset or as matters
turned out.
Burden of proof and presumptions
13. Whether a transaction was brought about by the exercise of undue influence is
a question of fact. Here, as elsewhere, the general principle is that he who asserts
a wrong has been committed must prove it. The burden of proving an allegation of
undue influence rests upon the person who claims to have been wronged. This is
the general rule. The evidence required to discharge the burden of proof depends
on the nature of the alleged undue influence, the personality of the parties, their
relationship, the extent to which the transaction cannot readily be accounted for by
the ordinary motives of ordinary persons in that relationship, and all the
circumstances of the case.
14.
 
Proof that the complainant placed trust and confidence in the other party in
relation to the management of the complainant’s financial affairs, coupled with a
transaction which calls for explanation, will normally be sufficient, failing
satisfactory evidence to the contrary, to discharge the burden of proof. On proof of
these two matters the stage is set for the court to infer that, in the absence of a
satisfactory explanation, the transaction can only have been procured by undue
influence. In other words, proof of these two facts is prima facie evidence that the
defendant abused the influence he acquired in the parties’ relationship. He
preferred 
his own interests. He did not behave fairly to the other. So the evidential
burden then shifts to him. It is for him to produce evidence to counter the inference
which otherwise should be drawn …
16.
 
Generations of equity lawyers have conventionally described this situation
as one in which a presumption of undue influence arises. This use of the term
‘presumption’ is descriptive of a shift in the evidential onus on a question of fact.
When a plaintiff succeeds by this route he does so because he has succeeded in
establishing a case of undue influence. The court has drawn appropriate
inferences of fact upon a balanced consideration of the whole of the evidence at
the end of a trial in which the burden of proof rested upon the plaintiff. The use, in
the course of the trial, of the forensic tool of a shift in the evidential burden of proof
should not be permitted to obscure the overall position. These cases are the
equitable counterpart of common law cases where the principle of res ipsa loquitur
is invoked. There is a rebuttable evidential presumption of undue influence.
17.
 
The availability of this forensic tool in cases founded on abuse of influence
arising from the parties’ relationship has led to this type of case sometimes being
labelled ‘presumed undue influence’. This is by way of contrast with cases
involving actual pressure or the like, which are labelled ‘actual undue influence’. …
This usage can be a little confusing. In many cases where a plaintiff has claimed
that the defendant abused the influence he acquired in a relationship of trust and
confidence the plaintiff has succeeded by recourse to the rebuttable evidential
presumption. But this need not be so. Such a plaintiff may succeed even where
this presumption is not available to him; for instance, where the impugned
transaction was not one which called for an explanation.
18.
 
The evidential presumption discussed above is to be distinguished sharply
from a different form of presumption which arises in some cases. The law has
adopted a sternly protective attitude towards certain types of relationship in which
one party acquires influence over another who is vulnerable and dependent and
where, moreover, substantial gifts by the influenced or vulnerable person are not
normally to be expected. Examples of relationships within this special class are
parent and child, guardian and ward, trustee and beneficiary, solicitor and client,
and medical adviser and patient. In these cases the law presumes, irrebuttably,
that one party had influence over the other. The complainant need not prove he
actually reposed trust and confidence in the other party. It is sufficient for him to
prove the existence of the type of relationship.
19.
 
It is now well established that husband and wife is not one of the
relationships to which this latter principle applies … there is nothing unusual or
strange in a wife, from motives of affection or for other reasons, conferring
substantial financial benefits on her husband. Although there is no presumption,
the court will nevertheless note, as a matter of fact, the opportunities for abuse
which flow from a wife’s confidence in her husband. The court will take this into
account with all the other evidence in the case. Where there is evidence that a
husband has taken unfair advantage of his influence over his wife, or her
confidence in him, ‘it is not difficult for the wife to establish her title to relief’ …
Independent advice
20. Proof that the complainant received advice from a third party before entering
into the impugned transaction is one of the matters a court takes into account
when weighing all the evidence. The weight, or importance, to be attached to such
advice depends on all the circumstances. In the normal course, advice from a
solicitor or other outside adviser can be expected to bring home to a complainant a
proper understanding of what he or she is about to do. But a person may
understand fully the implications of a proposed transaction, for 
instance, a
substantial gift, and yet still be acting under the undue influence of another. Proof
of outside advice does not, of itself, necessarily show that the subsequent
completion of the transaction was free from the exercise of undue influence.
Whether it will be proper to infer that outside advice had an emancipating effect, so
that the transaction was not brought about by the exercise of undue influence, is a
question of fact to be decided having regard to all the evidence in the case.
Manifest disadvantage
21. As already noted, there are two prerequisites to the evidential shift in the
burden of proof from the complainant to the other party. First, that the complainant
reposed trust and confidence in the other party, or the other party acquired
ascendancy over the complainant. Second, that the transaction is not readily
explicable by the relationship of the parties.
22.
 
Lindley LJ summarised this second prerequisite in the leading authority of
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
, 36 Ch D 145, where the donor parted with almost all her
property. Lindley LJ pointed out that where a gift of a small amount is made to a
person standing in a confidential relationship to the donor, some proof of the
exercise of the influence of the donee must be given. The mere existence of the
influence is not enough. He continued, at p. 185: ‘But if the gift is so large as not to
be reasonably accounted for on the ground of friendship, relationship, charity, or
other ordinary motives on which ordinary men act, the burden is upon the donee to
support the gift’ …
24. …
 
The second prerequisite, as expressed by Lindley LJ, is good sense. It
is a necessary limitation upon the width of the first prerequisite. It would be absurd
for the law to presume that every gift by a child to a parent, or every transaction
between a client and his solicitor or between a patient and his doctor, was brought
about by undue influence unless the contrary is affirmatively proved. Such a
presumption would be too far-reaching. The law would be out of touch with
everyday life if the presumption were to apply to every Christmas or birthday gift by
a child to a parent, or to an agreement whereby a client or patient agrees to be
responsible for the reasonable fees of his legal or medical adviser. The law would
be rightly open to ridicule, for transactions such as these are unexceptionable.
They do not suggest that something may be amiss. So something more is needed
before the law reverses the burden of proof, something which calls for an
explanation. When that something more is present, the greater the disadvantage to
the vulnerable person, the more cogent must be the explanation before the
presumption will be regarded as rebutted.
25.
 
This was the approach adopted by Lord Scarman in 
National Westminster
Bank plc
 
v. 
Morgan
 
[1985] AC 686, 703–707. He cited Lindley LJ’s observations in
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
 
36 Ch D 145, 185, which I have set out above. He noted that
whatever the legal character of the transaction, it must constitute a disadvantage
sufficiently serious to require evidence to rebut the presumption that in the
circumstances of the parties’ relationship, it was procured by the exercise of undue
influence …
26.
 
Lord Scarman attached the label ‘manifest disadvantage’ to this second
ingredient necessary to raise the presumption. This label has been causing
difficulty. It may be apt enough when applied to straightforward transactions such
as a substantial gift or a sale at an undervalue. But experience has now shown
that this expression can give rise to misunderstanding. The label is being
understood and applied in a way which does not accord with the meaning intended
by Lord Scarman, its originator.
27.
 
The problem has arisen in the context of wives guaranteeing payment of
their husband’s business debts. In recent years judge after judge has grappled with
the baffling question 
whether a wife’s guarantee of her husband’s bank overdraft,
together with a charge on her share of the matrimonial home, was a transaction
manifestly to her disadvantage.
28.
 
In a narrow sense, such a transaction plainly (‘manifestly’) is
disadvantageous to the wife. She undertakes a serious financial obligation, and in
return she personally receives nothing. But that would be to take an unrealistically
blinkered view of such a transaction. Unlike the relationship of solicitor and client
or medical adviser and patient, in the case of husband and wife there are inherent
reasons why such a transaction may well be for her benefit. Ordinarily, the fortunes
of husband and wife are bound up together. If the husband’s business is the
source of the family income, the wife has a lively interest in doing what she can to
support the business. A wife’s affection and self-interest run hand-in-hand in
inclining her to join with her husband in charging the matrimonial home, usually a
jointly-owned asset, to obtain the financial facilities needed by the business. The
finance may be needed to start a new business, or expand a promising business,
or rescue an ailing business.
29.
 
Which, then, is the correct approach to adopt in deciding whether a
transaction is disadvantageous to the wife: the narrow approach, or the wider
approach? The answer is neither. The answer lies in discarding a label which gives
rise to this sort of ambiguity. The better approach is to adhere more directly to the
test outlined by Lindley LJ in 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
 
36 Ch D 145, and adopted by Lord
Scarman in 
National Westminster Bank plc
 
v. 
Morgan
 
[1985] AC 686, in the
passages I have cited.
30.
 
I return to husband and wife cases. I do not think that, in the ordinary
course, a guarantee of the character I have mentioned is to be regarded as a
transaction which, failing proof to the contrary, is explicable only on the basis that it
has been procured by the exercise of undue influence by the husband. Wives
frequently enter into such transactions. There are good and sufficient reasons why
they are willing to do so, despite the risks involved for them and their families. They
may be enthusiastic. They may not. They may be less optimistic than their
husbands about the prospects of the husbands’ businesses. They may be anxious,
perhaps exceedingly so. But this is a far cry from saying that such transactions as
a class are to be regarded as prima facie evidence of the exercise of undue
influence by husbands.
31.
 
I have emphasised the phrase ‘in the ordinary course’. There will be cases
where a wife’s signature of a guarantee or a charge of her share in the matrimonial
home does call for explanation. Nothing I have said above is directed at such a
case.
A cautionary note
32. I add a cautionary note. … It concerns the general approach to be adopted by
a court when considering whether a wife’s guarantee of her husband’s bank
overdraft was procured by her husband’s undue influence. Undue influence has a
connotation of impropriety. In the eye of the law, undue influence means that
influence has been misused. Statements or conduct by a husband which do not
pass beyond the bounds of what may be expected of a reasonable husband in the
circumstances should not, without more, be castigated as undue influence.
Similarly, when a husband is forecasting the future of his business, and expressing
his hopes or fears, a degree of hyperbole may be only natural. Courts should not
too readily treat such exaggerations as misstatements.
33.
 
Inaccurate explanations of a proposed transaction are a different matter.
So are cases where a husband, in whom a wife has reposed trust and confidence
for the management of their financial affairs, prefers his interests to hers and
makes a choice for both of them on that footing. Such a husband abuses the
influence he has. He fails to discharge the obligation of candour and fairness he
owes a wife who is looking to him to make the major financial decisions.
Lord Clyde
92. I question the wisdom of the practice which has grown up, … of attempting to
make classifications of cases of undue influence. That concept is in any event not
easy to define. … It is something which can be more easily recognised when found
than exhaustively analysed in the abstract. Correspondingly the attempt to build up
classes or categories may lead to confusion. The confusion is aggravated if the
names used to identify the classes do not bear their actual meaning. Thus on the
face of it a division into cases of ‘actual’ and ‘presumed’ undue influence appears
illogical. It appears to confuse definition and proof. There is also room for
uncertainty whether the presumption is of the existence of an influence or of its
quality as being undue. I would also dispute the utility of the further sophistication
of subdividing ‘presumed undue influence’ into further categories. All these
classifications to my mind add mystery rather than illumination.
93. There is a considerable variety in the particular methods by which undue
influence may be brought to bear on the grantor of a deed. They include cases of
coercion, domination, victimisation and all the insidious techniques of persuasion.
Certainly it can be recognised that in the case of certain relationships it will be
relatively easier to establish that undue influence has been at work than in other
cases where that sinister conclusion is not necessarily to be drawn with such ease.
English law has identified certain relationships where the conclusion can prima
facie be drawn so easily as to establish a presumption of undue influence. But this
is simply a matter of evidence and proof. In other cases the grantor of the deed will
require to fortify the case by evidence, for example, of the pressure which was
unfairly applied by the stronger party to the relationship, or the abuse of a trusting
and confidential relationship resulting in for the one party a disadvantage and for
the other a collateral benefit beyond what might be expected from the relationship
of the parties. At the end of the day, after trial, there will either be proof of undue
influence or that proof will fail and it will be found that there was no undue
influence. In the former case, whatever the relationship of the parties and however
the influence was exerted, there will be found to have been an actual case of
undue influence. In the latter there will be none …
Lord Hobhouse of Woodborough
(1)
 
Presumed undue influence
103. The division between presumed and actual undue influence derives from the
judgments in 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
. Actual undue influence presents no relevant
problem. It is an equitable wrong committed by the dominant party against the
other which makes it unconscionable for the dominant party to enforce his legal
rights against the other. It is typically some express conduct overbearing the other
party’s will. It is capable of including conduct which might give a defence at law, for
example, duress and misrepresentation. … Actual undue influence does not
depend upon some pre-existing relationship between the two parties though it is
most commonly associated with and derives from such a relationship. He who
alleges actual undue influence must prove it.
104.
 
Presumed undue influence is different in that it necessarily involves some
legally recognised relationship between the two parties. As a result of that
relationship one party is treated as owing a special duty to deal fairly with the
other. It is not necessary for present purposes to define the limits of the
relationships which give rise to this duty. Typically they are fiduciary or closely
analogous relationships … Such legal relationships can be described as
relationships where one party is legally presumed to repose trust and confidence in
the other—the other side of the coin to the duty not to abuse that confidence. But
there is no 
presumption properly so called that the confidence has been abused. It
is a matter of evidence. … Thus, at the trial the judge will decide on the evidence
whether he is in fact satisfied that there was no abuse of confidence. It will be
appreciated that the relevance of the concept of ‘manifest disadvantage’ is
evidential. It is relevant to the question whether there is any issue of abuse which
can properly be raised. It is relevant to the determination whether in fact abuse did
or did not occur. It is a fallacy to argue from the terminology normally used,
‘presumed undue influence’, to the position, not of presuming that one party
reposed trust and confidence in the other, but of presuming that an abuse of that
relationship has occurred; factual inference, yes, once the issue has been properly
raised, but not a presumption.
105.
 
The Court of Appeal in 
Aboody
 
[1990] 1 QB 923 and Lord Browne-
Wilkinson [in 
O’Brien
] classified cases where there was a legal relationship
between the parties which the law presumed to be one of trust and confidence as
‘presumed undue influence: class 2(A)’. They then made the logical extrapolation
that there should be a class 2(B) to cover those cases where it was proved by
evidence that one party had in fact reposed trust and confidence in the other. It
was then said that the same consequences flowed from this factual relationship as
from the legal class 2(A) relationship. …
107.
 
In agreement with what I understand to be the view of your Lordships, I
consider that the so-called class 2(B) presumption should not be adopted. It is not
a useful forensic tool. The wife or other person alleging that the relevant
agreement or charge is not enforceable must prove her case. She can do this by
proving that she was the victim of an equitable wrong. This wrong may be an overt
wrong, such as oppression; or it may be the failure to perform an equitable duty,
such as a failure by one in whom trust and confidence is reposed not to abuse that
trust by failing to deal fairly with her and have proper regard to her interests.
Although the general burden of proof is, and remains, upon her, she can discharge
that burden of proof by establishing a sufficient prima facie case to justify a
decision in her favour on the balance of probabilities, the court drawing appropriate
inferences from the primary facts proved. Evidentially, the opposite party will then
be faced with the necessity to adduce evidence sufficient to displace that
conclusion. Provided it is remembered that the burden is an evidential one, the
comparison with the operation of the doctrine res ipsa loquitur is useful.
Lord Scott of Foscote
Undue influence
151. Undue influence cases have, traditionally, been regarded as falling into two
classes, cases where undue influence must be affirmatively proved (Class 1) and
cases where undue influence will be presumed (Class 2). The nature of the two
classes was described by Slade LJ in 
Bank of Credit and Commerce International
SA
 
v. 
Aboody
 
[1990] 1 QB 923, 953:
‘Ever since the judgments of this court in 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
 
… clear distinction has been drawn between
(1) those cases in which the court will uphold a plea of undue influence only if it is satisfied that such
influence has been affirmatively proved on the evidence (commonly referred to as cases of “actual
undue influence” … “Class 1” cases); (2) those cases (commonly referred to as cases of “presumed
undue influence” … “Class 2” cases) in which the relationship between the parties will lead the court to
presume that undue influence has been exerted unless evidence is adduced proving the contrary, eg by
showing that the complaining party has had independent advice.’
152. This passage provides, if I may respectfully say so, an accurate summary
description of the two classes. But, like most summaries, it requires some
qualification.
153.
 
First, the Class 2 presumption is an evidential rebuttable presumption. It
shifts the onus from the party who is alleging undue influence to the party who is
denying it. Second, the weight of the presumption will vary from case to case and
will depend both on the particular nature of the relationship and on the particular
nature of the impugned transaction. Third, the type and weight of evidence needed
to rebut the presumption will obviously depend upon the weight of the presumption
itself …
154.
 
The onus will, of course, lie on the person alleging the undue influence to
prove in the first instance sufficient facts to give rise to the presumption. The
relationship relied on in support of the presumption will have to be proved.
155.
 
In 
National Westminster Bank plc
 
v. 
Morgan
 
[1985] AC 686, 704 Lord
Scarman, referring to the character of the impugned transaction in a Class 2 case,
said: ‘it must constitute a disadvantage sufficiently serious to require evidence to
rebut the presumption that in the circumstances of the relationship between the
parties it was procured by the exercise of undue influence’. Lord Scarman went on:
‘In my judgment, therefore, the Court of Appeal erred in law in holding that the presumption of undue
influence can arise from the evidence of the relationship of the parties without also evidence that the
transaction itself was wrongful in that it constituted an advantage taken of the person subjected to the
influence which, failing proof to the contrary, was explicable only on the basis that undue influence had
been exercised to procure it.’
With respect to Lord Scarman, the reasoning seems to me to be circular. The
transaction will not be ‘wrongful’ unless it was procured by undue influence. Its
‘wrongful’ character is a conclusion, not a tool by which to detect the presence of
undue influence. On the other hand, the nature of the transaction, its inexplicability
by reference to the normal motives by which people act, may, and usually will,
constitute important evidential material.
156.
 
Lord Browne-Wilkinson in 
CIBC Mortgages plc
 
v. 
Pitt
 
[1994] 1 AC 200
pointed out, plainly correctly, that if undue influence is proved, the victim’s right to
have the transaction set aside will not depend upon the disadvantageous quality of
the transaction. Where, however a Class 2 presumption of undue influence is said
to arise, the nature of the impugned transaction will always be material, no matter
what the relationship between the parties. … It is, in my opinion, the combination
of relationship and the nature of the transaction that gives rise to the presumption
and, if the transaction is challenged, shifts the onus to the transferee …
161.
 
For my part, I doubt the utility of the Class 2B classification. Class 2A is
useful in identifying particular relationships where the presumption arises. The
presumption in Class 2B cases, however, is doing no more than recognising that
evidence of the relationship between the dominant and subservient parties,
coupled with whatever other evidence is for the time being available, may be
sufficient to justify a finding of undue influence on the balance of probabilities. The
onus shifts to the defendant. Unless the defendant introduces evidence to
counteract the inference of undue influence that the complainant’s evidence
justifies, the complainant will succeed. In my opinion, the presumption of undue
influence in Class 2B cases has the same function in undue influence cases as res
ipsa loquitur has in negligence cases. It recognises an evidential state of affairs in
which the onus has shifted.
162.
 
In the surety wife cases it should, in my opinion, be recognised that
undue influence, though a possible explanation for the wife’s agreement to become
surety, is a relatively unlikely one. 
O’Brien
 
itself was a misrepresentation case.
Undue influence had been alleged but the undoubted pressure which the husband
had brought to bear to persuade his reluctant wife to sign was not regarded by the
judge or the Court of Appeal as constituting undue influence. The wife’s will had
not been overborne by her husband. Nor was 
O’Brien
 
a case in which, in my
opinion, there would have been at any stage in the case a presumption of undue
influence.
Commentary
The decision of the House of Lords is one of enormous significance for banks and, to a
lesser extent, solicitors called upon to advise non-commercial parties who agree to
become guarantors. The practical significance of the case lies principally in the practical
guidance given to banks and solicitors in relation to the procedures to be adopted in
such cases. Our principal interest, by contrast, is in the analysis of undue influence. A
number of points can be made.
The first is that their Lordships declined to provide a comprehensive definition of undue
influence. The emphasis was very much on the facts and circumstances of the individual
case (see, for example, [13]). Thus relationships are ‘infinitely various’ ([10]) and no
description of the relevant factors is ‘perfect’ or ‘all embracing’ ([11]). The focus of the
doctrine seems to be rather more on the defendant than the claimant. Thus influence
must not be ‘abused’ ([6]) and undue influence is said to have ‘a connotation of
impropriety’ ([32]). But it may be ‘impropriety’ in an attenuated form, as 
Allcard
 
v.
Skinner
 
suggests, where the ‘impropriety’ apparently took the form of not ensuring that
the plaintiff had access to independent advice before she decided to give away all her
property.
Secondly, their Lordships affirmed the continued existence of a distinction between
cases of actual and presumed undue influence (with the apparent exception of Lord
Clyde at [92]). Lord Nicholls seemed to conceive of actual undue influence in terms of
‘improper pressure or coercion’ so that there was ‘much overlap with the principle of
duress’ ([8]
  
). Lord Hobhouse, on the other hand, defined actual undue influence in
broader terms (see [103]) when he said that it was an ‘equitable wrong’ which typically
consisted of ‘some express conduct overbearing the other party’s will’. The importance
of the distinction should not, however, be over-stated. Actual and presumed undue
influence describe different ways in which undue influence can be established. In the
case of actual undue influence it is exercised by way of some overt act, whereas in a case
of presumed undue influence it is ‘exercised less directly and its existence is inferred
from a consideration of the facts relating to the transaction under consideration and the
relationship of the parties to that transaction’ (
Evans
 
v. 
Lloyd
 
[2013] EWHC 1725 (Ch),
[37]).
Thirdly, the speeches contain much by way of discussion of presumed undue influence,
although they seem to raise more questions than they answer. First, they affirm that the
presumption is a rebuttable evidential presumption (see [16]). Secondly, the future of
‘the class 2B presumption’ is now very doubtful. Lord Hobhouse stated that ‘it should
not be adopted’ ([107]), Lord Scott doubted its utility ([161]), and Lord Clyde was
generally hostile to the use of presumptions ([92]). This being the case, there does not
appear to be much point in leading evidence for the purpose of seeking to raise the
presumption of undue influence. Instead, evidence should be led for the purpose of
proving that undue influence has been exercised. The presumption still has a role to play
in ‘class 2A cases’ and, indeed, Lord Nicholls stated that, in certain relationships, the law
presumes ‘irrebuttably’ that one party had influence over the other (see [18]).
Fourthly, ‘manifest disadvantage’ as a control device may have been replaced by the test
originally adopted by Lindley LJ in 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
 
(1887) 36 Ch D 145, 185, namely
that the gift must have been so large that it cannot be accounted for on the grounds of
friendship, relationship, charity, or other ordinary motives on which ordinary men act.
This was certainly the view of Lord Nicholls ([29]), although Lord Hobhouse referred to
manifest disadvantage without apparent criticism (at [104]). But it may be that this
change will have little effect in practice. It is a change of label rather than substance. The
courts are simply seeking a label to denote a transaction or a gift which calls for an
explanation.
Fifthly, it was confirmed that the relationship of husband and wife does not give rise to a
presumption of undue influence ([19]).
Sixthly, it is not entirely clear what it is that is being presumed. Is it dependence? Is it
exploitation? The answer would appear to be that there are different presumptions and
that they operate in different ways. Thus certain relationships appear to give rise to a
presumption of trust and confidence or ‘influence’ and, as Lord Nicholls points out, that
presumption may be irrebuttable ([18]). But this does not appear to be the same thing as
the presumption of undue influence. In order to raise the presumption of undue
influence it appears to be necessary to prove both the nature of the relationship between
the parties and that the transaction is one that is not explicable by ordinary motives on
which ordinary people act (see [21]). Once these two elements have been proved the law
then presumes that undue influence has been exercised, unless the contrary is
established. This latter presumption may be better described as a ‘factual inference’ (see
[104]). Thus Lord Hobhouse states that it is the relationship of trust and confidence that
is presumed and that ‘there is no presumption properly so called that the confidence has
been abused’ ([104]). While the court may be willing to draw a ‘factual inference’ that
abuse has taken place in certain cases, it is not the case that the law ‘presumes’ that
abuse has taken place.
The effect of 
Etridge
 
is to make it much more difficult for wives to establish that they
have been the victims of undue influence by their husbands, at least at the trial of the
action (different considerations appear to apply at the interlocutory stage, where the
courts are less likely to strike out the claim as unarguable on a ground that relates to
what has taken place between the husband and the wife). This is evidenced by the
application of the law to the facts of the various cases in the speech of Lord Scott (at
[194]–[374]). At the trial of the action judges are encouraged to examine the facts of the
case in order to decide, 
on the facts
, whether or not undue influence has been exercised
(see, for example, 
Annulment Funding Co Ltd
 
v. 
Cowey
 
[2010] EWCA Civ 711, [2010]
BPIR 1304). Thus Lord Scott stated (at [219]) that in a case ‘where there has been a full
trial … the judge must decide on the totality of the evidence before the court whether or
not the allegation of undue influence has been proved’. Where the allegation takes the
form of actual undue influence, the wife must prove that she has been the subject of
threats or other forms of wrongdoing by her husband. On the other hand, where she
relies on the presumption of undue influence the judge must first of all decide whether
or not the presumption has been triggered and, for that to happen, the wife must prove
that a relationship of trust and confidence exists between the parties and that the
transaction is one that is not explicable by ordinary motives on which ordinary people
act. Wives are likely to find it difficult to prove the conditions necessary to trigger the
operation of the presumption. This is so for two reasons. First, the relationship between
husband and wife does not ordinarily trigger the presumption. However, it is not
impossible. In one of the appeals in 
Etridge
 
the husband and wife were Hasidic Jews
and the wife’s upbringing and education ‘prepared her to expect and to accept a position
of subservience and obedience to the wishes of her husband’ ([283]). In this case Lord
Scott considered that the Court of Appeal had been correct to conclude that the
presumption of undue influence arose on the facts of the case. Secondly, in the ordinary
case, a guarantee by a wife of her husband’s debts can be accounted for on the ground of
their relationship and so does not give rise to an inference of undue influence. It is not a
transaction that calls for an explanation or is inexplicable by reference to the ordinary
motives on which ordinary people act.
Turning now to the circumstances in which the bank is put on inquiry that there is
potential wrongdoing by the husband (or party in a similar position), the threshold
adopted by 
the House of Lords is a low one (the passages from the speech of Lord
Nicholls on this issue can be found in the 
online resources
).
Essentially, the bank is put on inquiry whenever a wife offers to stand surety for her
husband’s debts or the debts of his business, even in the case where she is a shareholder
and participates in the running of the company (but where the advance is made to the
husband and wife jointly the bank is not put on inquiry unless the bank is aware that the
loan is being made for the husband’s purposes, as distinct from their joint purposes; see
[48]). The same principle applies to unmarried couples, whether heterosexual or
homosexual, where the bank is aware of the relationship (see [47]). The bank can also be
put on inquiry where there is a relationship between the parties but that relationship is
not sexual (see, for example, 
Credit Lyonnais Bank Nederland NV
 
v. 
Burch
 
[1997] 1 All
ER 144). This extension potentially gives rise to difficulty in terms of defining the limits
of the circumstances in which the bank is put on inquiry. Lord Nicholls therefore
concluded (at [84]) that the bank is put on inquiry in ‘every case where the relationship
between the surety and the debtor is non-commercial’. In all non-commercial cases the
creditor must take reasonable steps to bring home to the individual guarantor the risks
he is running by standing as surety. The line between commercial and non-commercial
sureties may be indistinct at the margins. Lord Nicholls gave as examples of commercial
sureties cases where the guarantor is being paid a fee or is guaranteeing the debts of
another company in the same group (see [88]). But in the vast majority of cases the
distinction between a commercial and a non-commercial surety should not create
difficulties in practice.
In relation to the steps to be taken by the bank once it has been put on inquiry, Lord
Nicholls provided the banks with guidance at [79] of his speech. One point to note is
that the bank is not required to meet with the wife and explain to her the nature of the
transaction before she enters into it. It suffices for the bank to satisfy itself that the wife
has been advised by her own solicitor. In many ways the obligations imposed on
solicitors are more onerous than those imposed on banks. This leads us to the final issue
which relates to the role of solicitors. As Lord Nicholls observed at [52] many of the
difficulties that have arisen in this area ‘stem from serious deficiencies, or alleged
deficiencies, in the quality of the legal advice given to wives’. He concluded that
independent legal advice for wives had been a ‘fiction’ and a ‘charade’. The guidance
given by Lord Nicholls in [65] and [74] is clearly designed to provide more effective
protection for wives by ensuring, as far as possible, that they have access to reliable,
independent advice before they decide whether or not to act as guarantors of their
husband’s debts. Whether that protection will prove to be effective in the real world is,
of course, another matter.
19.4
 
The Post-
Etridge
 
Cases
The cases post-
Etridge
 
continue to exhibit some uncertainty as to the basis of the
doctrine of undue influence. Three cases in particular are worthy of note. The first two
(
R
 
v. 
Attorney-General for England and Wales
 
[2003] UKPC 22 and 
National
Commercial Bank (Jamaica) Ltd
 
v. 
Hew
 
[2003] UKPC 51) are decisions of the Privy
Council, while the third (
Pesticcio
 
v. 
Huet
 
[2004] EWCA Civ 372, [2004] All ER (D) 36
(Apr)) is a decision of the Court of Appeal. The former two cases incline towards a
defendant-oriented conception of undue influence, whereas the latter very much
supports a claimant-oriented perception. There is a risk in setting up the cases in this
way that the impression is given that the courts must choose either a claimant-sided
version of undue influence or a defendant-sided version. However, there is 
no necessary
need to restrict the choice in this way. It is possible to conclude that both elements are
relevant and that the task of the court is in all cases to weigh the evidence before it when
deciding whether or not undue influence has been established on the facts. We shall now
turn to consider each case in turn.
19.4.1
 
R
 
v. 
Attorney-General for England and
Wales
The first case is the decision of the Privy Council in 
R
 
v. 
Attorney-General for England
and Wales
 
[2003] UKPC 22. The appellant, known simply as ‘R’, was a member of the
SAS and, during the Gulf War of 1991, he was a member of the Bravo Two Zero patrol
that was dropped behind enemy lines in Iraq in order to find Scud missiles and cut
communication lines. After the war was over there was considerable concern within the
SAS, and the Ministry of Defence more generally, about books written by former
members of the SAS in which they gave an account (the accuracy of which was
contested) of their experience as members of the Bravo Two Zero patrol. The Ministry of
Defence decided to respond to this state of affairs by requiring existing SAS members to
sign a confidentiality contract under which the soldiers covenanted, inter alia, not to
‘disclose without express prior authority in writing from MOD any information,
document or other article relating to the work of, or in support of, the United Kingdom
Special Forces which is, or has been in my possession by virtue of my position as a
member of any of those Forces’.
The appellant signed the contract but shortly afterwards left the Army, having applied
for premature voluntary release. He returned to his native New Zealand and in 1998 he
entered into a contract with New Zealand publishers for the publication of his own
account of life as a member of the Bravo Two Zero patrol. The New Zealand publishers
offered the UK rights to Hodder & Stoughton, who passed a copy of the manuscript on
to the Ministry of Defence. The Attorney-General, on behalf of the Crown, then
commenced proceedings in the High Court of New Zealand, in which he sought an
injunction to restrain publication of the book, damages, and an account of profits. The
New Zealand Court of Appeal refused to grant an injunction to restrain publication of
the book, but made an order for an account of profits and an assessment of damages.
The appellant appealed to the Privy Council.
The appellant defended the Crown’s claim for damages and an account of profits on a
number of grounds, one of which was that the confidentiality contract had been
obtained as a result of the exercise of undue influence. The Privy Council, by a majority,
rejected his claim. Lord Hoffmann, giving the judgment of the majority, stated:
21. The subject of undue influence has recently been re-examined in depth by the House of Lords in 
Royal Bank
of Scotland plc
 
v. 
Etridge (No 2)
 
[2002] AC 773. Their Lordships summarise the effect of the judgments. Like
duress at common law, undue influence is based upon the principle that a transaction to which consent has
been obtained by unacceptable means should not be allowed to stand. Undue influence has concentrated in
particular upon the unfair exploitation by one party of a relationship which gives him ascendancy or influence
over the other.
22.
 
The burden of proving that consent was obtained by unacceptable means is upon the party who alleges
it. Certain relationships—parent and child, trustee and beneficiary, etc—give rise to a presumption that one
party had influence over the other. That does not of course in itself involve a presumption that he unfairly
exploited his influence. But if the transaction is one which cannot reasonably be explained by the relationship,
that will be prima facie evidence of undue influence. Even if the relationship does not fall into one of the
established categories, the evidence may show that one party did in fact have influence over the other. In such a
case, the nature of the transaction may likewise give rise to a prima facie inference that it was obtained by
undue influence. In the absence of contrary evidence, the court will be entitled to find that the burden of
proving unfair exploitation of the relationship has been discharged.
23.
 
The absence of independent legal advice may or may not be a relevant matter according to the
circumstances. It is not necessarily an unfair exploitation of a relationship for one party to enter into a
transaction with the other without ensuring that he has obtained independent legal advice. On the other hand,
the transaction may be such as to give rise to an inference of undue influence even if the induced party was
advised by an independent lawyer and understood the legal implications of what he was doing.
This summary is important for a number of reasons. First, it attempts to draw an
analogy between undue influence and common law duress. Secondly, there is an
emphasis on ‘unacceptable means’ and ‘unfair exploitation’ which suggests that the
focus of attention is upon the conduct of the defendant rather than the state of mind of
the claimant. Thirdly, the presumption to which certain relationships give rise is that
‘one party had influence over the other’; it is not a ‘presumption that he unfairly
exploited his influence’.
For the purposes of the hearing, their Lordships were content to assume that the Army
was able to exercise influence over the appellant. The vital question was whether ‘the
nature of the transaction was such as to give rise to an inference that it was obtained by
an unfair exploitation of that relationship’. On this point Lord Hoffmann concluded (at
[24]):
Like the Court of Appeal, their Lordships do not think that the confidentiality agreement can be so described. As
in the case of duress, their Lordships think that the finding that it was an agreement which anyone who wished
to serve or continue serving in the SAS could reasonably have been required to sign is fatal to such a conclusion.
The reason why R signed the agreement was because, at the time, he wished to continue to be a member of the
SAS. If facing him with such a choice was not illegitimate for the purposes of duress, their Lordships do not
think that it could have been an unfair exploitation of a relationship which consisted in his being a member of
the SAS. There seems to their Lordships to be some degree of contradiction between R’s claim, in the context of
duress, that he signed only because he was threatened with return to his unit and his claim, for the purposes of
undue influence, that he signed because of the trust and confidence which he reposed in the Army or his
commanding officer.
The issue which troubled the majority was ‘the absence of legal advice’. But the lack of
independent advice, while ‘a matter for regret’, did not result in the transaction being
one in which the Ministry of Defence had unfairly exploited its influence over the
appellant. 
The majority concluded that there had been no such exploitation. The
appellant did not contend that he did not understand the nature of the transaction into
which he had entered. Further, the absence of legal advice did not affect the fairness of
the transaction. The most that the appellant could say was that a ‘lawyer might have
advised him to reflect upon the matter and … that might have led to his not signing at
all’ but that was a decision which he could have made without a lawyer’s advice. The
appellant’s attempt to invoke undue influence therefore failed.
Lord Scott dissented in relation to the application of the principles of undue influence to
(1)
(2)
(3)
the facts of the case. He drew heavily upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in 
Allcard
v. 
Skinner
 
(1887) 36 Ch D 145 (
19.3
) and continued:
41. Are these principles ones that should be applied to the contract in the present case? I think they are. The
appellant was not, of course, an unworldly man in a secluded religious order. He was a soldier in a highly
trained and efficient fighting unit. The essence of efficiency in a military unit is obedience to orders. The Armed
Services operate on a hierarchical basis. Each rank looks to the rank or ranks above for direction and, having
received that direction, is expected to comply with it. It is, in my opinion, entirely artificial to draw sharp
distinctions between orders from senior officers that are military orders breach of which will be an offence
under military law and may attract court martial sanctions and ‘orders’ from senior officers couched as requests
or as recommendations. It has become a music-hall joke for a sergeant-major to say to the troops under him ‘I
want three volunteers; you, you and you’. The hierarchical culture of the Armed Services and the deference and
obedience to senior officers, both commissioned and non-commissioned, which is part of that culture are the
essential background to the circumstances in which the appellant was asked to sign the contract in the present
case …
44.
 
The circumstances in which the contract in the present case came to be signed by the appellant were the
subject of evidence at trial and the trial judge, Salmon J, formed a number of important conclusions:
The judge concluded that the appellant signed because he had been ordered to do so. An analysis of the
‘order’ that disqualifies it from constituting a military order and regards it, no doubt correctly, merely as
a recommendation or a direction is, in my opinion, of no more than marginal significance if the
possibility of undue influence is being considered. What is important is how the appellant regarded it.
The appellant regarded it as an order.
The judge found that ‘the defendant was not told the terms of the contract before signing [and] was not
offered any legal advice’ (para 39).
He found, also, that the appellant was not permitted to show the contract to a legal adviser (para 139).
The weight of this finding is not diminished by evidence from the senior officer in command of the
Regiment to the effect that soldiers would have been permitted to show the contract to approved legal
advisers if they had asked. What is important is the perception of the appellant, and, as to that, Salmon
J’s finding stands.
45. In my opinion, the relationship between the appellant and his senior officers and the circumstances, as
found by the judge, in which the contract came to be signed by the appellant produced a classic ‘relationship’
case in which undue influence should be presumed. No evidence was introduced to rebut that presumption.
Legal advice was not available to the appellant. As in 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
, where no suggestion of fraud or indeed
any impropriety was made against the lady superior to whom the plaintiff had transferred her assets, no such
suggestion has been, or could be, made against any of the appellant’s senior officers who play a part in the story.
It is the relationship, produced by the background to which I have referred, between a soldier and that part of
the Armed Services of which he is a member, that introduces the potentially vitiating element into the contract.
If the Ministry of Defence wants to impose contractual obligations on soldiers by which they will be bound when
they leave the service, it must, in my opinion, at the least make available to them independent legal advice.
Fairness, in my view, requires it and I think the law requires it. In this case it was not done. I would have
allowed the appeal.
The difference between the analysis of Lord Scott and that employed by the majority
appears to lie in the fact that Lord Scott focused on the nature of the relationship
between the parties, whereas the majority placed greater emphasis on the need for some
wrongdoing on the part of the Ministry of Defence. While the majority were prepared to
assume that the Army was able to exercise influence over the appellant, they found that
the facts of the case ‘did not give rise to an inference that [the transaction] was obtained
by an unfair exploitation of that relationship’. Lord Scott, by contrast, had regard to the
nature of the relationship between the appellant and the Army and, from that
relationship, was prepared to infer the existence of undue influence without the need to
identify specific wrongdoing on the part of the Army. In his view the nature of the
relationship between the parties imposed certain obligations on the Army, for example
to provide independent legal advice, and their failure to discharge these obligations,
should, in his opinion, have entitled the appellant to succeed with his undue influence
claim.
19.4.2
 
National Commercial Bank (Jamaica) Ltd
v. 
Hew
The second case is the decision of the Privy Council in 
National Commercial Bank
(Jamaica) Ltd
 
v. 
Hew
 
[2003] UKPC 51. Lord Millett there described the doctrine of
undue influence in the following terms:
29. Undue influence is one of the grounds on which equity intervenes to give redress where there has been some
unconscionable conduct on the part of the defendant. It arises whenever one party has acted unconscionably by
exploiting the influence to direct the conduct of another which he has obtained from the relationship between
them …
30.
 
Thus the doctrine involves two elements. First, there must be a relationship capable of giving rise to the
necessary influence. And secondly the influence generated by the relationship must have been abused.
31.
 
The necessary relationship is variously described as a relationship ‘of trust and confidence’ or ‘of
ascendancy and dependency’. Such a relationship may be proved or presumed. Some relationships are
presumed to generate the necessary influence; examples are solicitor and client and medical adviser and
patient. The banker-customer relationship does not fall within this category. But the existence of the necessary
relationship may be proved as a fact in any particular case …
33.
 
But the second element is also necessary. However great the influence which one person may be able to
wield over another equity does not intervene unless that influence has been abused. Equity does not save people
from the consequences of their own folly; it acts to save them from being victimised by other people: see 
Allcard
v. 
Skinner
 
(1887) 36 Ch D 145, 182.
34.
 
Thus it must be shown that the ascendant party has unfairly exploited the influence he is shown or
presumed to possess over the vulnerable party. It is always highly relevant that the transaction in question was
manifestly disadvantageous to the person seeking to set it aside; though this is not always necessary: see 
CIBC
Mortgages plc
 
v. 
Pitt
 
[1994] 1 AC 200. But ‘disadvantageous’ in this context means ‘disadvantageous’ as
between the parties. Unless the ascendant party has exploited his influence to obtain some unfair advantage
from the vulnerable party there is no ground for equity to intervene. However commercially disadvantageous
the transaction may be to the vulnerable party, equity will not set it aside if it is a fair transaction as between the
parties to it.
Once again we can see the emphasis placed on the conduct of the party who is alleged to
have exercised the undue influence. It does not suffice to prove that a relationship of
trust and confidence existed between the parties. Nor does it suffice to demonstrate that
the transaction was a disadvantageous one for the party seeking to set it aside. It must
be demonstrated that there was some advantage-taking on the part of the party who is
seeking to uphold the agreement. The nature of that advantage-taking is described in
various terms by Lord Millett. Thus he refers to ‘abuse’ (at [30]), ‘victimisation’ (at [33]),
and ‘exploitation’ (at [34]). From this case, together with 
Etridge
 
and 
R
 
v. 
Attorney-
General for England and Wales
, it can be inferred that undue influence is defendant-
sided in its emphasis so that some form of wrongdoing on the part of the party alleged to
have exercised undue influence would appear to be an indispensable element of an
undue influence claim (albeit the wrongdoing can assume different forms).
This emphasis on wrongdoing has not been universally welcomed. Professor Birks
((2004) 120 
LQR
 
34) sounded a warning in relation to the difficulties that were likely to
arise from an insistence on wrongdoing in all cases. In particular, while the emphasis on
wrongdoing may open the prospect of the award of compensatory damages in an undue
influence claim, it may also shut out the possibility of relief in the case where the
claimant cannot establish wrongdoing on the part of the defendant. 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
(
19.3
) may well come into this category (notwithstanding Lord Millett’s citation of
Allcard
 
in support of his analysis in 
Hew
 
at [33]). This is important where the claimant
seeks relief in the form of rescission of the contract. In such a case, why does the
claimant have to prove some element of wrongdoing on the part of the defendant? There
is no such requirement in the law of misrepresentation where, as has been noted (see
17.4.1
), an innocent misrepresentation gives rise to a right to rescind and innocent
misrepresentation is not a wrong which attracts compensatory damages. Similarly,
Professor Birks asserted that not all cases of undue influence can be regarded as cases of
wrongs (an example which he cited in addition to 
Allcard
 
is 
Hammond
 
v. 
Osborn
 
(on
which see 
19.1
)). He therefore maintained that English law should continue to recognize
a category of ‘innocent undue influence’ (that is to say the claimant is subject to too
much influence in the sense that his volition is impaired but there is no advantage-
taking by the defendant). He concluded (at p. 37) as follows:
As with misrepresentation, undue influence may be a wrong in aggravating circumstances. That is largely
unexplored territory. It is certainly not always a wrong. A party who makes no claim to shift a loss from himself
to another but merely requires that other to return to the 
status quo
 
does not need to find and prove those extra
facts. A misrepresentee can rely for that same limited purpose on an innocent misrepresentation whether
because the representation really was innocent or because he does not need to and does not choose to prove the
aggravating facts. The same applies to one whose autonomy is impaired by the fact that another has excessive
influence over him. It would be odd if, in triggering rescission and return to the 
status quo
, relational paralysis
were less potent than misrepresentation.
19.4.3
 
Pesticcio
 
v. 
Huet
This point was taken up in clear terms by Mummery LJ in our third case, which is the
decision of the Court of Appeal in 
Pesticcio
 
v. 
Huet
 
[2004] EWCA Civ 372, [2004] All
ER (D) 36 (Apr). Mummery LJ (at [20]) objected to the defendant-sided conception of
undue influence in the following terms:
The insistence of [counsel] that Maureen [the person alleged to have exercised undue influence over her
brother] had ‘done nothing wrong’ is an instance of the ‘continuing misconceptions’ mentioned by Sir Martin
Nourse in 
Hammond
 
about the circumstances in which gifts will be set aside on the ground of presumed undue
influence. Although undue influence is sometimes described as an ‘equitable wrong’ or even as a species of
equitable fraud, the basis of the court’s intervention is not the commission of a dishonest or wrongful act by the
defendant, but that, as a matter of public policy, the presumed influence arising from the relationship of trust
and confidence should not operate to the disadvantage of the victim, if the transaction is not satisfactorily
explained by ordinary motives: 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
 
(1887) 36 Ch D 145 at 171. The court scrutinises the
circumstances in which the transaction, under which benefits were conferred on the recipient, took place and
the nature of the continuing relationship between the parties, rather than any specific act or conduct on the part
of the recipient. A transaction may be set aside by the court, even though the actions and conduct of the person
who benefits from it could not be criticised as wrongful. The presumption arising from the trust and confidence
of their relationship made it unnecessary, for example, for Bernard [the party seeking to set aside the deed of
gift] to prove that Maureen actually had influence over him in relation to the gift of the house, let alone that she
in fact exercised undue influence or applied improper pressure to obtain the Deed of Gift.
19.4.4
 
Conclusion
Where do we stand in the light of these cases? The vast majority of undue influence
cases will involve some advantage-taking on the part of the defendant in connection
with a relationship of trust that exists between the claimant and the defendant (albeit
that the advantage-taking will assume different forms). But we should not exclude the
possibility that, exceptionally, a claimant may be able to demonstrate that he or she was
so dependent 
upon the defendant that a finding of undue influence can be made, even in
the absence of specific wrongdoing on the part of the defendant. In other words, undue
influence may require a court to focus attention on the claimant’s state of mind 
and
 
the
conduct of the defendant. That is to say it may require a court to consider the nature of
the relationship that existed between the claimant and the defendant and to analyse the
appropriateness of the transaction, the claimant’s motivation, and the defendant’s
behaviour in the context of that relationship (M Chen-Wishart, ‘Undue Influence:
Beyond Impaired Consent and Wrongdoing Towards a Relational Analysis’ in A Burrows
and Lord Rodger of Earlsferry (eds), 
Mapping the Law
 
(Oxford University Press, 2006)
p. 201).
FURTHER READING
B
IRKS
, P
, ‘Undue Influence as Wrongful Exploitation’ (2004) 120 
LQR
 
34.
B
IRKS
, P
 
AND
 
C
HIN
 N
YUK
 Y
IN
, ‘On the Nature of Undue Influence’ in 
J B
EATSON
 
AND
 
D
F
RIEDMANN
 
(eds), 
Good Faith and Fault in Contract Law
 
(Oxford University Press,
1995), p. 57.
C
HEN
-W
ISHART
, M
, ‘Undue Influence: Beyond Impaired Consent and Wrongdoing
Towards a Relational Analysis’ in 
A B
URROWS
 
AND
 L
ORD
 R
ODGER
 
OF
 E
ARLSFERRY
 
(eds),
Mapping the Law
 
(Oxford University Press, 2006), p. 201.
C
HEN
-W
ISHART
, M
, ‘Undue Influence: Vindicating Relationships of Influence’ [2006]
Current Legal Problems
 
231.
T
HOMPSON
, M
, ‘Wives, Sureties and Banks’ [2002] 
Conveyancer and Property
Lawyer
 
174.
Test your knowledge by trying this chapter’s 
Multiple Choice
Questions
1.
2.
3.
20
Unconscionability and Inequality of
Bargaining Power
Central Issues
The role of fairness in the law of contract is a matter of some
controversy. It is clear that the law is concerned with matters of
procedural fairness, although the extent of that concern and the
meaning of procedural fairness is a matter of debate. More difficult is
the role of substantive fairness. Can a court set aside a contract on the
ground that it is substantively unfair or is the function of substantive
unfairness confined to the provision of evidence from which some
other ground of invalidity can be deduced?
In this chapter consideration will be given to a range of cases in which
the courts were asked to set aside a contract on the ground that the
contract was, in some way, unfair. An examination of the cases will
reveal that the courts have invoked a range of factors in deciding
whether or not to set aside a contract. These factors include matters
such as the existence of a special or serious disadvantage or disability
on the part of the party seeking to set aside the contract, actual or
constructive fraud on the part of the party seeking to enforce the
contract, the role of independent advice, and the presence of
disadvantageous terms.
It is also necessary to examine the role of Parliament in regulating
unfair terms and the reasons why the courts have so far refused to
recognize a general doctrine of unconscionability or inequality of
bargaining power. The chapter will conclude by drawing on various
analyses of unconscionability and the role of substantive fairness in
the law of contract.
20.1
 
Introduction
There is no doubt that the law recognizes that duress and undue influence can suffice to
set aside a contract (see 
Chapters 18
 
and 
19
). More difficult is the question whether or
not a court can set aside a contract on the ground that it is in some way unfair. Does
English law recognize a doctrine of unconscionability or inequality of bargaining power?
The House of 
Lords in 
National Westminster Bank
 
v. 
Morgan
 
[1985] AC 686 (
20.4
) saw
no need for a general doctrine of inequality of bargaining power (a view confirmed by
the Supreme Court in 
Pakistan International Airline Corporation
 
v. 
Times Travel (UK)
Ltd
 
[2021] UKSC 40, [2021] 3 WLR 727, [26]). Nevertheless, specific instances can be
found of cases in which courts have intervened to set aside a contract that was, in the
view of the court, unfair. The exact scope of these decisions is the subject of some
debate. A further issue is whether or not the law ought to bring these disparate cases
together and form one coherent doctrine. Lord Denning attempted to do this in 
Lloyds
Bank Ltd
 
v. 
Bundy
 
[1975] QB 326 (
20.4
) but his attempt was rejected by the House of
Lords in 
National Westminster Bank
 
v. 
Morgan
 
[1985] AC 686.
In so far as these decisions are based on the unfairness of the procedure by which the
contract was concluded they are not particularly controversial. The laws of
misrepresentation and duress demonstrate that the law of contract is concerned with
the fairness of the procedure by which a contract has been concluded. Much more
difficulty is created by the proposition that the law of contract is concerned with the
substantive fairness of the terms of the contract, particularly the adequacy or the
fairness of the price. The fairness of the terms is a matter for the parties to decide, not
the courts. The latter proposition is a fundamental tenet of freedom of contract. Can a
commitment to the fairness of the terms be reconciled with a commitment to freedom of
contract? Professor Collins, 
The Law of Contract
 
(4th edn, Butterworths, 2003), pp.
270–271 has stated:
A system of contract law committed to freedom of contract must reject controls over the fairness of contracts.
No matter that the purchaser has paid an excessive price or the seller received a gross undervalue, the principle
of freedom to select the terms must prohibit intervention designed to redress the balance of obligations. At most
the law can scrutinize minutely the procedures leading up to the contract to ensure that the freedom of the
parties was not restricted by pressure, fraud, abuse of positions of trust, and other factors which interfered with
the voluntariness of consent. Tests of procedural propriety are both compatible with and required by the
principle of freedom of contract, but any examination of the fairness of the substance of the contract must be
forbidden. Accordingly, texts describing the classical law of contract offered no place for a discussion of a
requirement of fairness in contracts.
A reluctance to acknowledge the significance of substantive unfairness in contracts as a ground for
intervention still characterises judicial decisions in the common law. A court will stress any elements of
procedural impropriety that it can discover rather than address directly the unfairness of the bargain. The
substantive unfairness may provide the motive for intervention, but the formal legal reason given for upsetting
the contract will be couched in terms of a procedural defect, such as deception, manipulation or unfair surprise.
This approach receives further support from economic analysis of law, since these procedural defects can be
regarded as evidence of market failure which prevented the operation of a competitive and efficient market. To
discover the real significance of substantive unfairness in the common law of contract therefore requires an
investigation which digs behind the formal reasons given for decisions.
In this chapter it will be necessary to ‘dig behind the formal reasons given for decisions’
in order to ascertain the reason for the intervention of the court in the cases that have
been extracted in the 
online resources
 
which support this book. The most difficult
issue relates to the role of the substantive unfairness of the term or terms of the
contract. What role, if any, does a concern for substantive fairness play in the cases? And
what is the role of procedural fairness? Is there any one factor that predominates or do
the courts rely upon a mixture of 
factors? Academic analyses of the cases often draw
upon a mixture of factors. Thus Nicholas Bamforth (
20.5
) identifies four factors that are
consistently taken into account by the courts (namely, (i) special or serious disadvantage
or disability, (ii) actual or constructive fraud, (iii) lack of independent advice, and (iv)
disadvantageous terms) while David Capper (
20.5
) identifies three factors (namely, (i)
relational inequality, (ii) transactional imbalance, and (iii) unconscionable conduct). It
may be that it is impossible to locate one factor which alone can explain all the cases and
that the multi-factor approach is the best one to adopt. But such an approach has its
dangers in that different courts can give different weight to the various factors with the
consequence that the cases develop in an inconsistent and haphazard fashion.
This chapter will proceed in four stages. First, brief consideration will be given to a
group of cases in which the courts have been asked to grant relief on the basis that the
contract concluded between the parties was, in some way, unfair. Secondly, we shall
outline one or two examples of the statutory regulation of unfair terms. Then, thirdly,
consideration will be given to the arguments in favour of drawing these disparate cases
together into one general doctrine before concluding the chapter by drawing on some
academic reflections on the case-law and the role of fairness in the law of contract more
generally.
20.2
 
Unfairness in the Cases
There are a number of cases in which the courts have set aside a contract on the ground
that it was, in some way, unfair. These cases can be grouped into a number of categories
but it cannot be said that these categories are watertight. Extracts from the judgments in
the principal cases referred to in this section can be found in the 
online resources
which support this book. Here we shall confine ourselves to a brief account of the cases
and of the grounds on which they were decided and to one example of the way in which
the courts exercise this jurisdiction.
The first group of cases concerns the protection which equity has long afforded to
‘expectant heirs’ (that is to say young men who would inherit a substantial fortune on
the death of their father but who had very limited immediate access to cash and were
thus vulnerable to exploitation by moneylenders). A leading example is 
Earl of
Aylesford
 
v. 
Morris
 
(1873) 8 Ch App 484. The plaintiff, when he was a young man of 22,
had run up a large number of debts. His father was in poor health and he stood to
inherit a large amount of property on the death of his father. His creditors were pressing
for payment and the defendant moneylender agreed to lend him money to pay off these
debts. The plaintiff received no independent advice and the rate of interest which the
defendant demanded was over 60 per cent. The plaintiff applied to have the defendant’s
actions for payment restrained and succeeded in doing so. It was held that, in the
circumstances of the case, the transaction could not stand unless the defendant could
repel the presumption that it had been procured unconscientiously by proving that the
transaction with the plaintiff was fair, just, and reasonable. This the defendant was
unable to do.
The second group of cases concerns the protection which English law has traditionally
afforded to what have been termed ‘poor and ignorant persons’. The leading case is 
Fry
v. 
Lane
 
(1888) 40 Ch D 312. The plaintiffs were two brothers. One was a laundryman
and the other worked for a plumber. They sold their reversionary interests in the estate
of John Fry to the defendant for £170 and £270, respectively. When they entered into
the transaction, they were 
advised by an inexperienced solicitor who was acting for both
parties to the transaction. The property which was the subject of their interest was later
sold for £3,848, of which the plaintiffs’ share would have been £730 each. The proceeds
of the sale were paid into court. An actuary stated that JB Fry’s contingent interest in the
£730 would have been valued at £475 at the date of the transaction. The plaintiffs’ claim
to set aside the transaction with the defendant was successful. There were three
elements to the decision of Kay J: (i) the plaintiffs were ‘poor and ignorant’, (ii) the sale
was at an undervalue, and (iii) the plaintiffs were not independently advised. Proof of
these three matters suffices to shift the onus of proof on to the defendant to prove that
the transaction was fair, just, and reasonable and, once again, the defendant was unable
to do this. A more modern example of the exercise of the same jurisdiction is provided
by 
Creswell
 
v. 
Potter
 
[1978] 1 WLR 255. On the break-up of her marriage to the
defendant, the plaintiff, a telephonist, released and conveyed to the defendant her
interest in the matrimonial home in return for an indemnity against liability under the
mortgage. The defendant later sold the former matrimonial home and made a profit of
£1,400 on the sale. The plaintiff sought to set aside the release on the ground that it was
exercised in circumstances which amounted to unfair dealing. Her claim was successful.
She established that she was ‘poor’ (in the sense that she was a member of ‘the lower
income group’) and ‘ignorant’ (which for this purpose meant ‘less highly educated’), that
the sale was at a considerable undervalue, and that she had not received any
independent advice. The defendant was unable to prove that the transaction was fair,
just, and reasonable (for a further example, see 
Credit Lyonnais Bank Nederland NV
 
v.
Burch
 
[1997] 1 All ER 144).
Thirdly, cases can be found in which the courts have intervened to protect claimants
who have found themselves in extremely difficult circumstances and the defendant has
attempted to exploit that situation. An example in this category is 
The Medina
 
(1876) 1 P
272. Here the plaintiffs sought to take advantage of the imminent danger in which the
master of a vessel and some pilgrims found themselves. Their vessel had been wrecked
and they were huddled on a rock, awaiting rescue. The plaintiffs declined to rescue the
pilgrims unless they were paid £4,000. The defendants, not having any other alternative
open to them (other than death), promised to pay this sum. When the plaintiffs sued to
recover the promised amount, the court declined to order the defendants to pay and,
instead, relegated the plaintiffs to a claim for £1,800 (for another example of a court
intervening to set aside an extortionate salvage agreement, see 
The Port Caledonia and
The Anna
 
[1903] P 184).
But the courts have generally been slow to grant relief in cases of alleged unfairness. As
Dillon LJ observed in 
Alec Lobb (Garages) Ltd
 
v. 
Total Oil (Great Britain) Ltd
 
[1985] 1
WLR 173, 183: ‘[t]he courts would only interfere in exceptional cases where as a matter
of common fairness it was not right that the strong should be allowed to push the weak
to the wall.’ To similar effect is the judgment of Rose J in 
The Libyan Investment
Authority
 
v. 
Goldman Sachs International
 
[2016] EWHC 2530 (Ch), [132], where she
observed that ‘generally speaking the law will not intervene to save people from making
improvident bargains’. Before ‘the court will consider setting a contract aside as an
unconscionable bargain, one party has to have been disadvantaged in some relevant way
as regards the other party, that other party must have exploited that disadvantage in
some morally culpable manner, and the resulting transaction must be overreaching and
oppressive’ (
Strydom
 
v. 
Vendside Ltd
 
[2009] EWHC 2130 (QB), [39]). All of these
elements must be present before a contract will be set aside as an unconscionable
bargain. No one factor will suffice. In particular, it is insufficient for the claimant to
establish that the bargain was a hard one or in some other way improvident; it is
necessary to go further and establish that the defendant took advantage of the claimant’s
position (
Fineland Investments Ltd
 
v. 
Pritchard
 
[2011] EWHC 113 (Ch), [2011] All ER
(D) 18 (Feb)).
The most recent authoritative summary of the various jurisdictions to set aside a
contract which are discussed in this section was provided by the Supreme Court in
Pakistan International Airline Corporation
 
v. 
Times Travel (UK) Ltd
 
[2021] UKSC 40,
[2021] 3 WLR 727. Thus Lord Hodge stated (at [23]–[24]):
Unconscionability is not an overarching criterion to be applied across the board without regard to context. Were
it so, judges would become arbiters of what is morally and socially acceptable. Equity takes account of the
factual and legal context of a case and has identified specific contexts which call for judicial intervention to
protect the weaker party. For example …
the equitable doctrine of unconscionable bargains has been applied where B is at a serious disadvantage
relative to A through ‘poverty, or ignorance, or lack of advice or otherwise’ so that circumstances existed of
which unfair advantage could be taken; A exploited B’s weakness in a morally culpable manner; and the
resulting transaction was not merely hard or improvident but overreaching and oppressive: 
Alec Lobb
(Garages) Ltd
 
v. 
Total Oil (Great Britain) Ltd
 
[1983] 1 WLR 87, 94–95, per Peter Millett QC, sitting as a deputy
High Court judge. … Examples of unconscionable transactions include circumstances in which A knowingly
negotiates an agreement with B while B is elderly, unwell and intoxicated (
Blomley
 
v. 
Ryan
 
(1954) 99 CLR 362)
and where a poor, illiterate and unwell person is induced to enter into a disadvantageous transaction without
advice and in great haste (
Clark
 
v. 
Malpas
 
(1862) 4 De GF & J 401; 45 ER 1238). In 
Fry
 
v. 
Lane
 
(1888) 40 Ch D
312, Kay J summarised the then existing case-law in these terms (p 322): ‘where a purchase is made from a poor
and ignorant man at a considerable undervalue, the vendor having no independent advice, a Court of Equity
will set aside the transaction.’ He held that the circumstances of poverty, ignorance and lack of independent
advice impose on the purchaser the burden of showing that the purchase was fair, just and reasonable. Unequal
bargaining power does not suffice; it is necessary for the claimant to show that unconscientious advantage has
been taken of his or her disabling condition or circumstances: 
Boustany
 
v. 
Pigott
 
(1993) 69 P & CR 298 (JCPC)
at p 303 per Lord Templeman. Extortionate bargains can be struck down or varied in other circumstances; see,
for example, 
The Port Caledonia and the Anna
 
[1903] P 184 in which the court drastically reduced a claim for
salvage where a ship’s captain in an emergency had been forced to accept an extortionate offer from a tug
captain for the provision of salvage services. But the rules relating to salvage may depend on specialties of
maritime law. …
To similar effect is the following passage from the judgment of Lord Burrows (at [77]):
[T]he law on ‘unconscionable bargains’ … deals not with illegitimate threats or pressure but with the
exploitation by A of a weakness of B by entering into a contract that is clearly disadvantageous to B who has not
obtained independent advice. In almost all past English cases on unconscionable bargains, B has been an
individual with a mental weakness such as inexperience, confusion because of old age or emotional strain: see,
eg, 
Earl of Aylesford
 
v. 
Morris
 
(1873) 8 Ch App 484; 
Fry
 
v. 
Lane
 
(1888) 40 Ch D 312; 
Cresswell
 
v. 
Potter
(Note)
 
[1978] 1 WLR 255; 
Backhouse
 
v. 
Backhouse
 
[1978] 1 WLR 243; 
Boustany
 
v. 
Pigott
 
(1993) 69 P & CR
298; 
Chitty on Contracts
, 33rd ed (2018), paras 8-132 to 8-142. But it is not inconceivable that the relevant
weakness could be the very weak bargaining position of a company; and this possibility was recognised 35 years
ago by the Court of Appeal in 
Alec Lobb Garages Ltd
 
v. 
Total Oil (Great Britain) Ltd
 
[1985] 1 WLR 173.
The cumulative nature of the tests applied by the courts, combined with their stringent
requirements, has the consequence that very few modern examples can be found of
contracts which have been set aside on the ground of unconscionability. One such
exceptional case is:
BOUSTANY V. PIGOTT
(1995) 69 P & CR 298, Privy Council
In 1977 Miss Pigott leased property to Mrs Boustany for a period of five years at a
monthly rent of $833.33. Miss Pigott was ‘quite slow’, and her affairs were
managed by her cousin, George Pigott. In 1980 Mrs Boustany discussed the
possibility of a new lease with George Pigott but no agreement was reached. Later
that year, while George Pigott was away, Mrs Boustany went to the chambers of a
certain Mr Kendall and presented him with a copy of a new lease which was for ten
years at a monthly rent of $1,000, renewable at the same rent at the option of Mrs
Boustany. Mr Kendall demanded to see Miss Pigott together with Mr and Mrs
Boustany and, during the course of the interview, he pointed out to Miss Pigott
various aspects of the agreement which were not in her best interests but she
insisted that he draw up the agreement. He did so. When George Pigott
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
discovered what had happened he protested to Mrs Boustany, who was unmoved
and so he asked for a declaration that the lease was an unconscionable bargain
which should be declared null and void. The Privy Council, upholding the decision
of the Court of Appeal of the Eastern Caribbean States, set aside the lease as an
unconscionable bargain.
Lord Templeman
[giving the judgment of the Privy Council]
In a careful and thoughtful submission, Mr Robertson, who appeared before the
Board on behalf of Mrs Boustany, made the following submissions with which their
Lordships are in general agreement:
It is not sufficient to attract the jurisdiction of equity to prove that a bargain
is hard, unreasonable or foolish; it must be proved to be unconscionable, in
the sense that ‘one of the parties to it has imposed the objectionable terms
in a morally reprehensible manner, that is to say, in a way which affects his
conscience’: 
Multiservice Bookbinding
 
v. 
Marden
 
[1979] Ch 84, 110.
‘Unconscionable’ relates not merely to the terms of the bargain but to the
behaviour of the stronger party, which must be characterised by some
moral culpability or impropriety: 
Lobb (Alec) (Garages) Limited
 
v. 
Total Oil
(Great Britain) Limited
 
[1983] 1 WLR 87, 94.
Unequal bargaining power or objectively unreasonable terms provide no
basis for equitable interference in the absence of unconscientious or
extortionate abuse of power where exceptionally, and as a matter of
common fairness, ‘it was not right that the strong should be allowed to push
the weak to the wall’: 
Lobb (Alec) (Garages) Limited
 
v. 
Total Oil (Great
Britain) Limited
 
[1985] 1 WLR 173, 183.
A contract cannot be set aside in equity as ‘an unconscionable bargain’
against a party innocent of actual or constructive fraud. Even if the terms of
the contract are ‘unfair’ in the sense that they are more favourable to one
party than the other (‘contractual imbalance’), equity will not provide relief
unless the beneficiary is guilty of unconscionable conduct: 
Hart
 
v. 
O’Connor
[1985] AC 1000 applied in 
Nichols
 
v. 
Jessup
 
[1986] NZLR 226.
‘In situations of this kind it is necessary for the plaintiff who seeks relief to
establish unconscionable conduct, namely that unconscientious advantage
has been taken of his disabling condition or circumstances’: per Mason J in
Commercial Bank of Australia Ltd
 
v. 
Amadio
 
(1983) 46 ALR 402, 413.
Mr Robertson submitted that Miss Pigott had received independent advice from Mr
Kendall, that she had been made aware by Mr Kendall that the terms of the 1980
lease were disadvantageous to her, that Miss Pigott could not be described as
poor or ignorant and that the judge did not find and could not, consistently with the
evidence, have found unconscionable behaviour on the part of Mrs Boustany.
The crucial question in this case is—what brought Miss Pigott to the chambers
of Mr Kendall in September 1980? That question was not answered by direct
evidence because Miss Pigott was not able to give evidence and Mrs Boustany
and her husband chose not to do so. The trial judge inferred unconscionable
conduct by Mrs Boustany after careful consideration of a number of features which
he held were only consistent with unconscientious conduct on the part of Mrs
Boustany. The management of the property had been given up by Miss Pigott
because of her incapacity. The properties were managed by Mr George Pigott and
there was no reason why Miss Pigott should interfere in the management of this
one property leased to Mrs Boustany. There was no evidence of any personal
attachment between Miss Pigott and her tenant. Mrs Boustany had negotiated with
Mr George Pigott and knew that he was the representative of Miss Pigott. No
advice was sought by Miss Pigott; she turned up not at her family’s solicitors but to
Mr Kendall who knew nothing about her save that he had prepared the 1976 lease.
Miss Pigott gave to Mr Kendall, according to his evidence, absurd reasons for the
grant of a new lease and no reason for the grant of a lease for 20 years on
disadvantageous terms.
Miss Pigott must have been under a total misapprehension of the facts when
she represented that she might be worried about the property and about the repair
of the property while she was away. Mr Kendall forcibly pointed out not only to Miss
Pigott but also to Mrs Boustany and her husband the disadvantages to Miss Pigott
of the new lease but Mrs Boustany and her husband gave no explanation and
offered no concessions. They were content to allow Miss Pigott ostensibly to insist
on the unjustifiable terms which they must have already persuaded her to accept.
When a writ was issued Mrs Boustany did not write to the solicitor but sought out
Miss Pigott and obtained a disclaimer which the court in due course rejected. The
inference which the trial judge drew, and which he was entitled to draw, was that
Mrs Boustany and her husband had prevailed upon Miss Pigott to agree to grant a
lease on terms which they knew they could not extract from Mr George Pigott or
anyone else. When they were summoned by Mr Kendall and the unfairness of the
lease was pointed out to them, they did not release Miss Pigott from the bargain
which they had unfairly pressed on her. In short Mrs Boustany must have taken
advantage of Miss Pigott before, during and after the interview with Mr Kendall and
with full knowledge before the 1980 lease was settled that her conduct was
unconscionable.
Commentary
This is a curious judgment. The five ‘submissions’ listed by Lord Templeman are
followed by a list of six factors from which unconscionable conduct was inferred. It is
difficult to disagree with Nicholas Bamforth (‘Unconscionability as a Vitiating Factor’
[1995] 
LMCLQ
 
538, 543–544) when he concludes:
Boustany
 
v. 
Pigott
 
is a prime example of the imprecise approach which must be avoided if unconscionability is
to merit support as a vitiating factor. … There are some basic problems with the Privy Council’s treatment of the
facts. We are not told 
why
 
Mrs Boustany could be said to have had full knowledge that her conduct was
unconscionable, or how any of the ‘submissions’ were brought into play. Miss Pigott had been incapable of
giving evidence at the original trial and Mrs Boustany declined to do so, explaining the need to make inferences.
This cannot, however, justify the failure to explain the inferences in the light of the five ‘submissions’. The Privy
Council simply presented a list of ‘submissions’ and a list of factual findings, without connecting the two. As in
other unconscionability cases, terms such as ‘affects his conscience’, ‘moral culpability’, ‘unconscientious’ and
‘unconscionable’ were used without explanation of their precise meaning …
The danger of using pejorative terms should be clear: precision and clarity are crucial when a court is
drawing up and deploying criteria for assessing whether a transaction is unconscionable, for the court must
strike a delicate balance between conflicting policy considerations. On the one hand, it is important to safeguard
the certainty of commercial transactions, especially those involving real property. It is also, however, important
to protect weaker parties against improper exploitation in the bargaining process. The situation is further
complicated by the need, in protecting weaker parties, to avoid compromising their autonomy through excessive
judicial intervention in their transactions. The chances of striking a coherent balance between those
considerations are greatly reduced when courts use imprecise or ambiguous language, or fail properly to explain
why transactions are upheld or struck down.
A further difficulty with 
Boustany
 
is that Miss Pigott did have independent advice.
Indeed, Lord Templeman points out that the disadvantages of the new lease were
‘forcibly pointed out to her’. Why did this independent advice not suffice to negate her
claim? It is not entirely clear. It may be that not enough was done to bring home to Miss
Pigott the nature of the transaction she was concluding.
20.3
 
The Role of Statutes
Parliament also has a role to play in regulating unfair terms in contracts. The most
significant examples are Part 2 of the Consumer Rights Act 2015 (see 
Chapter 14
) and
the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 (
13.3
). A further example of legislative regulation of
unfair relationships is provided by sections 140A–140C of the Consumer Credit Act 1974
which provides protection for consumer debtors. Section 140A gives to the court the
power to make an order under section 140B,
if it determines that the relationship between the creditor and the debtor arising out of the agreement … is
unfair to the debtor because of one or more of the following: (a) any of the terms of the agreement or of any
related agreement; (b) the way in which the creditor has exercised or enforced any of his rights under the
agreement or any related agreement; or (c) any other thing done (or not done) by, or on behalf of the creditor.
This provision does not confer upon the courts a general jurisdiction to review
transactions concluded between commercial lenders and private borrowers in the name
of unfairness. 
Rather, the requirements of the section must be satisfied before the
jurisdiction of the court is triggered, albeit that the section is framed in broad terms. In
particular, the relationship between the debtor and the creditor must be unfair, the
focus of the court’s inquiry is upon hardship to the debtor (although matters relating to
the creditor may also be relevant to the court’s inquiry), and the alleged unfairness to
the debtor must have arisen from one of the factors listed in sub-paragraphs (a)–(c)
(
Plevin
 
v. 
Paragon Personal Finance Ltd
 
[2014] UKSC 61, [2014] 1 WLR 4222). Once
over the hurdles established by section 140A, section 140B confers broad powers on the
courts in order to remedy the unfairness in the relationship between these parties. Thus
they can (for example) order repayment of sums paid, reduce or discharge any sum
payable by the debtor, or alter the terms of the agreement.
While statutes provide individual examples of the regulation of unfair terms, it is
difficult to use statutes as building blocks in the construction of a general principle of
unconscionability or inequality of bargaining power. The reason for this is that statutes
and statutory instruments apply only to transactions that fall within their scope. They
cannot be applied by way of analogy to cases that fall outside their scope and the courts
have generally not been willing to rely on Acts of Parliament when developing the
common law (see 
National Westminster Bank plc
 
v. 
Morgan
 
[1985] AC 686, 
20.4
,
although contrast 
Timeload Ltd
 
v. 
British Telecommunications plc
 
[1995] EMLR 459,
13.3.3
).
20.4
 
A General Principle?
Thus far we have seen that English law has a collection of cases and statutes that seem to
reflect a concern for the fairness of the bargain that has been concluded by the parties.
But are they anything more than a collection of individual cases? Can they be
rationalized into a principle or set of principles of general application? Lord Denning
famously sought to create such a general principle in his judgment in 
Lloyds Bank Ltd
 
v.
Bundy
 
[1975] QB 326. He stated (at pp. 336–339):
Now let me say at once that in the vast majority of cases a customer who signs a bank guarantee or a charge
cannot get out of it. No bargain will be upset which is the result of the ordinary interplay of forces. There are
many hard cases which are caught by this rule. Take the case of a poor man who is homeless. He agrees to pay a
high rent to a landlord just to get a roof over his head. The common law will not interfere. It is left to
Parliament. Next take the case of a borrower in urgent need of money. He borrows it from the bank at high
interest and it is guaranteed by a friend. The guarantor gives his bond and gets nothing in return. The common
law will not interfere. Parliament has intervened to prevent moneylenders charging excessive interest. But it has
never interfered with banks.
Yet there are exceptions to this general rule. There are cases in our books in which the courts will set aside a
contract, or a transfer of property, when the parties have not met on equal terms—when the one is so strong in
bargaining power and the other so weak—that, as a matter of common fairness, it is not right that the strong
should be allowed to push the weak to the wall. Hitherto those exceptional cases have been treated each as a
separate category in itself. But I think the time has come when we should seek to find a principle to unite them.
I put on one side contracts or transactions which are voidable for fraud or misrepresentation or mistake. All
those are governed by settled principles. I go only to those where there has been inequality of bargaining power,
such as to merit the intervention of the court.
The categories
The first category is that of ‘duress of goods’ [on which see 
18.3
].
The second category is that of the ‘unconscionable transaction’. A man is so placed as to be in need of special
care and protection and yet his weakness is exploited by another far stronger than himself so as to get his
property at a gross undervalue. The typical case is that of the ‘expectant heir’ [see 
20.2
]. This second category is
said to extend to all cases where an unfair advantage has been gained by an unconscientious use of power by a
stronger party against a weaker.
The third category is that of ‘undue influence’ usually so called. These are divided into two classes as stated
by Cotton LJ in 
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
 
(1887) 36 Ch D 145, 171 [see 
19.3
].
The fourth category is that of ‘undue pressure’. The most apposite of that is 
Williams
 
v. 
Bayley
 
(1866) LR 1
HL 200 [see 
19.1
].
The fifth category is that of salvage agreements. When a vessel is in danger of sinking and seeks help, the
rescuer is in a strong bargaining position. The vessel in distress is in urgent need. The parties cannot be truly
said to be on equal terms [see 
20.2
].
The general principles
Gathering all together, I would suggest that through all these instances there runs a single thread. They rest on
‘inequality of bargaining power’. By virtue of it, the English law gives relief to one who, without independent
advice, enters into a contract upon terms which are very unfair or transfers property for a consideration which
is grossly inadequate, when his bargaining power is grievously impaired by reason of his own needs or desires,
or by his own ignorance or infirmity, coupled with undue influences or pressures brought to bear on him by or
for the benefit of the other. When I use the word ‘undue’ I do not mean to suggest that the principle depends on
proof of any wrongdoing. The one who stipulates for an unfair advantage may be moved solely by his own self-
interest, unconscious of the distress he is bringing to the other. I have also avoided any reference to the will of
the one being ‘dominated’ or ‘overcome’ by the other. One who is in extreme need may knowingly consent to a
most improvident bargain, solely to relieve the straits in which he finds himself. Again, I do not mean to suggest
that every transaction is saved by independent advice. But the absence of it may be fatal. With these
explanations, I hope this principle will be found to reconcile the cases.
Commentary
The choice of ‘inequality of bargaining power’ as the label was perhaps an unfortunate
one. It appeared to suggest that a mere imbalance in bargaining power would suffice to
give the court jurisdiction to intervene. But the sentence in Lord Denning’s judgment
immediately following the reference to ‘inequality of bargaining power’ makes clear that
what is required is both procedural and substantive unfairness. There must be a ‘grossly
inadequate’ consideration, a ‘grievous impairment’ of bargaining power, and ‘undue
influences or pressures’. This is hardly an easy test to satisfy. The creation of a general
principle found some supporters (see, for example, S Waddams, ‘Unconscionability in
Contracts’ (1976) 39 
MLR
 
369) who saw it as a means of unifying a range of disparate
cases and doctrines (for example, the penalty clause jurisdiction (
23.11
), the rules
relating to the incorporation and interpretation of exclusion clauses (
13.2
), the rules
relating to the incorporation of terms (
Chapter 9
), and the protection of weak and
vulnerable parties) and as a platform for the development of the law).
However, these hopes were dashed by the House of Lords in 
National Westminster
Bank plc
 
v. 
Morgan
 
[1985] AC 686, 707–708 when Lord Scarman stated:
Lord Denning MR [in 
Bundy
] believed that the doctrine of undue influence could be subsumed under a general
principle that English courts will grant relief where there has been ‘inequality of bargaining power’ (p. 339). He
deliberately avoided reference to the will of one party being dominated or overcome by another. The majority of
the court did not follow him; they based their decision on the orthodox view of the doctrine as expounded in
Allcard
 
v. 
Skinner
, 36 Ch D 145. The opinion of the Master of the Rolls, therefore, was not the ground of the
court’s decision, which was to be found in the view of the majority, for whom Sir Eric Sachs delivered the
leading judgment.
Nor has counsel for the respondent sought to rely on Lord Denning MR’s general principle; and, in my view,
he was right not to do so. The doctrine of undue influence has been sufficiently developed not to need the
support of a principle which by its formulation in the language of the law of contract is not appropriate to cover
transactions of gift where there is no bargain. The fact of an unequal bargain will, of course, be a relevant
feature in some cases of undue influence. But it can never become an appropriate basis of principle of an
equitable doctrine which is concerned with transactions ‘not to be reasonably accounted for on the ground of
friendship, relationship, charity, or other ordinary motives on which ordinary men act’ (Lindley LJ in 
Allcard
 
v.
Skinner
, at 185). And even in the field of contract I question whether there is any need in the modern law to
erect a general principle of relief against inequality of bargaining power. Parliament has undertaken the task—
and it is essentially a legislative task—of enacting such restrictions upon freedom of contract as are in its
judgment necessary to relieve against the mischief: for example, the hire-purchase and consumer protection
legislation, of which the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973, Consumer Credit Act 1974, Consumer
Safety Act 1978, Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 and Insurance Companies Act 1982 are examples. I
doubt whether the courts should assume the burden of formulating further restrictions.
Two points can be made in relation to the judgment of Lord Scarman. First, it depends
upon a particular perception of the relationship between the common law and statute
law. According to this view, once Parliament assumes the role of protecting the weak
and the vulnerable, the common law should return to its laissez-faire principles. But
there is another view. The alternative view is that the common law should build upon
the principles contained in these statutes: that is to say, the courts should see in these
statutes a commitment to fairness which should be reflected in the law outside the
immediate context of the statutes. The second point is that Lord Scarman gives priority
to Lord Denning’s choice of label over the substantive content of the principle he set out
in 
Bundy
. Greater concentration on the scope of the principle might have enabled it to
survive the scrutiny of the House of Lords. Notwithstanding these arguments, the
Supreme Court has recently affirmed the analysis of Lord Scarman in 
Pakistan
International Airline Corporation
 
v. 
Times Travel (UK) Ltd
 
[2021] UKSC 40, [2021] 3
WLR 727, [26] in the following terms:
It is not in dispute that there is in English common law no doctrine of inequality of bargaining power in
contract, although such inequality may be a relevant feature in some cases of undue influence: 
National
Westminster Bank Plc
 
v. 
Morgan
 
[1985] AC 686, 708 per Lord Scarman. As Lord Scarman observed in 
The
Universe Sentinel
 
(p 401), when he referred to 
the judgment of Lord Wilberforce and Lord Simon in 
Barton
 
v.
Armstrong
, in commercial life many acts are done under pressure and sometimes overwhelming pressure. In
negotiating a commercial contract each party to the negotiations seeks to obtain contractual entitlements which
he or she does not possess unless and until the parties agree the terms of the contract. Inequality of bargaining
power means that one party in the negotiation of a commercial contract may be able to impose terms on a
weaker party which a party of equal bargaining power would refuse to countenance. Equally, a party in a strong
bargaining position, such as a monopoly supplier, may refuse outright to enter into a contract which the weaker
party desires or may impose terms which the weaker party considers to be harsh. The courts have taken the
position that it is for Parliament and not the judiciary to regulate inequality of bargaining power where a person
is trading in a manner which is not otherwise contrary to law.
20.5
 
The Search for Coherence
If it is the case that a general principle of inequality of bargaining power or
unconscionability is not acceptable to the courts, is it possible to identify the range of
factors taken into account by the courts in the cases with a view to providing a
structured framework within which the courts can decide whether or not to set aside a
particular contract? Attempts have been made to identify these factors and, in so doing,
to bring about a greater degree of coherence and predictability in the law. Two examples
are set out. The first, provided by Nicholas Bamforth, identifies ‘unconscientious receipt’
as the basis for intervention and further identifies four factors that are generally taken
into account by the courts. Secondly, David Capper identifies three such factors,
although it is important to note that his list is part of a wider project, namely to merge
the doctrines of undue influence and unconscionability into one doctrine by subsuming
undue influence under his wider notion of unconscionability. At the end of the extract
Capper raises the question of the role of substantive unfairness in the law of contract.
He suggests that it performs an evidentiary function; that is to say it provides evidence
from which other grounds of invalidity can be deduced. The last extract takes up the
difficult question of the role of substantive unfairness in the law of contract. Professor
Stephen A Smith argues for a more extensive role for substantive unfairness than that
recognized by Capper. While he dismisses a number of reasons that are commonly put
forward in support of the proposition that substantively unfair contracts are ‘bad’, he
does identify one argument which, in his view, supports the proposition that such
contracts are bad. That argument is that substantively unfair contracts make it more
difficult for us to lead autonomous lives, in the sense that they make it more difficult for
us to plan and direct our lives.
N BAMFORTH, ‘UNCONSCIONABILITY AS A VITIATING
FACTOR’
[1995] LMCLQ 538, 555–557
Courts are not, in reality, acting in a wholly discretionary fashion in cases where
unconscionability is invoked as a vitiating factor. Behind the imprecise language,
four elements have characteristically been treated as important in assessing
whether a transaction should be set aside: first, whether the weaker party was
afflicted by a special or serious 
disadvantage or disability, mere inequality of
bargaining power being insufficient; secondly, whether the stronger party’s conduct
amounted to actual or constructive fraud; thirdly, whether the weaker party lacked
independent advice; fourthly, whether the terms of the transaction were clearly
disadvantageous to the weaker party.
However, the precise weight attached to each of the four elements seems to
vary. There are many views about the importance of the terms of the transaction by
comparison with the other three elements, and it has even been suggested that
disadvantageous terms might not always be necessary. On balance, the
unconscionability cases seem to conform with Professor Atiyah’s suggestion that,
in judicial assessments of the propriety of transactions, ‘ideas of procedural and
substantive fairness feed upon each other’. The fraud element is also problematic.
‘Dishonesty’—the actual fraud requirement—tends towards imprecision, and
reliance on constructive fraud would take the unconscionability vitiating factor
dangerously close to being the sort of general power, decried by Toohey J, to set
aside bargains just because they appear at first glance to be unfair or harsh. Given
the vagueness of this element, it is unsurprising that there have been differences
of judicial opinion about whether the stronger party’s knowledge of the other’s
weakness should be subjectively held or objectively assessed.
This brings us to two interconnected issues. The first—a policy issue—is
whether unconscionability deserves support as a distinct vitiating factor. The
second—an issue of legal principle—is to identify unconscionability’s juristic basis,
that is, to establish the general principle which underpins it and locates it at a
particular point within the law. These two issues are interconnected because failure
to identify an underpinning principle is likely to magnify any appearance of
imprecision in unconscionability cases, disturbing those who believe that law
should, as a matter of policy, embody a degree of certainty. A suitable underpinning
principle would, by contrast, provide a way of understanding, rationalising and
controlling the development of the vitiating factor’s four elements, minimising the
danger of palm tree justice. The identification of a suitable underpinning principle
therefore affects the assessment of unconscionability’s desirability, in policy terms,
as a vitiating factor. The relative importance attached to the three policy factors …
—certainty in commercial transactions, protection of weaker parties from improper
exploitation, and avoiding judicial intervention on a scale which deprives vulnerable
persons of any bargaining autonomy—is also likely to influence the categorisation
of a particular underpinning principle as suitable.
It is likely that for most lawyers the desirable policy balance will be something
of a compromise—enough certainty to enable forward planning and security of
receipt in transactions, but sufficient flexibility to leave room for a residual
unconscionability jurisdiction according to which utterly exploitative transactions
can be struck down. A variety of possible underpinning principles might fit within
this balance. ‘Inequality of bargaining power’ has been dismissed as an
underpinning principle in the case law—rightly, as it cannot explain the need for
special disadvantage and the relevance of the terms of the transaction. It is also, in
and of itself, too vague a principle on which to base an entire vitiating factor.
Another possibility has been canvassed by John Cartwright, who argues that ‘[t]  he
key is that one party has abused his or her [bargaining] position vis-à-vis the
other’. Unfortunately, the term ‘abuse’ does not assist us greatly, being as
pejorative as much of the language used by the judiciary. This impression is
confirmed by Cartwright’s suggestion that misrepresentation, duress and undue
influence might also be described as examples of ‘abuse of bargaining position’,
implying that ‘abuse’ is a malleable concept which can simply be adjusted to fit the
vitiating factor in play. A similar argument can be made against the suggestion that
the basis of unconscionability is the effecting of relief in equity from fraud. Fraud is
as vague a concept when deployed as an 
underpinning principle as it is when
treated as an element which needs to be established in an unconscionability claim;
and, like ‘abuse of bargaining position’, it appears to be capable of manipulation to
fit whatever vitiating factor or rule it is said to underpin.
The most appropriate possibility, within the policy balance envisaged, is the
suggestion that unconscionability works to reverse or prevent unjust enrichment …
unconscionability as a vitiating factor falls within the family of ‘unjust factors’
labelled ‘unconscientious receipt’, where ‘the question for restitution is that the
defendant behaved badly in receiving the value in question’.
If restitution for unconscientious receipt is the principle which underpins
unconscionability as a vitiating factor, it is necessary to identify the type of
behaviour which should be regarded as ‘bad’. Otherwise, unconscionability will be
indistinguishable from other forms of ‘unconscientious receipt’. It is here that the
four common elements in unconscionability cases come into play. For the purpose
of ‘unconscientious receipt’ behaviour will be deemed to be ‘bad’, in the sense
which justifies the intervention of unconscionability as a vitiating factor, where the
stronger party exploits, in a dishonest fashion, the special disadvantage of the
weaker party in concluding with them a bargain which is to their severe
disadvantage, where the weaker party lacks adequate independent advice. This
formulation, marrying the underpinning principle with the elements of
unconscionability, is general enough to allow the vitiating factor to adapt itself to
new fact-situations, but sufficiently specific that it will be kept under tight control. As
‘receipt’ rests on a defendant-sided approach, it follows that the unconscionability
vitiating factor should be confined to cases where there has been deliberate
wrongdoing by the stronger party—in other words, where they have subjectively
exploited the other’s weakness rather than fallen below an objectively-assessed
standard of conduct.
D CAPPER, 
‘UNDUE INFLUENCE AND
UNCONSCIONABILITY: A RATIONALISATION’
(1998) 114 LQR 479, 499–500
A New Doctrine of Unconscionability
How would this new doctrine work? In essence, the court would have to weigh up
the three elements of relational inequality, transactional imbalance, and
unconscionable conduct, and come to an overall judgment as to whether a
particular transaction can stand. This would not, however, be a purely
impressionistic exercise. Transactional imbalance would serve an evidentiary
function … The principal grounds for relief would thus be relational inequality and
unconscionable conduct. The more there was of one of these features, the less
would be required of the other; and where one was not strongly in evidence
transactional imbalance would be needed to bolster it. Where the parties to a
transaction are on very unequal terms and the transaction is weighted strongly in
favour of one party, unconscionable conduct can be inferred. Where the parties are
on fairly equal terms and the defendant has clearly behaved unconscionably, the
court could infer that the defendant’s conduct has induced an unfair transaction if
the transaction appears unbalanced. …
The new doctrine would be neither specifically plaintiff-sided nor specifically
defendant-sided. The stronger the plaintiff-sided factor the weaker the defendant-
sided factor needs to be and vice versa, although a degree of unconscionable
conduct would be present in all 
cases since the passive receipt of benefits flowing
under a seriously unbalanced transaction where the plaintiff was clearly in an
unequal relationship with the defendant would count as unconscionable conduct.
In theory a transaction could be unconscionable where the defendant has behaved
abominably and extracted benefits from a plaintiff on equal terms with himself,
although it is probably unlikely that there would be many cases like this. The new
doctrine would also be more concerned with procedural than with substantive
unfairness. The importance of substantive unfairness as a vitiating factor in
contract is acknowledged, but this tends to provide evidence from which grounds
of invalidity can be deduced rather than serve as a vitiating factor of itself.
Substantive unfairness is not likely to become an independent ground of invalidity
so long as courts maintain the approach that they cannot make or remake a
contract for the parties. If a contract is substantively unfair, the obvious solution
would be to alter it to make it fair, but with some very limited exceptions, English
law does not do this.
Capper returned to his theme in a later article (‘The Unconscionable Bargain in the
Common Law World’ (2010) 126 
LQR
 
403) where he noted a difference between the
scope of the unconscionable bargain doctrine as it has evolved in England and the
doctrine as it has developed in other parts of the Commonwealth. He set out the
difference in the following terms (at p. 416):
The unconscionable bargain doctrine in England and Wales is starkly different from doctrines of substantially
similar juridical bases that are applied by the courts of Ireland, Australia, New Zealand and Canada. The
difference is most apparent in the insistence by English courts that harsh terms must be imposed on the weaker
party by the stronger party in a morally reprehensible manner. English law is not receptive to the view that a
contract can be unconscionable because the terms are very much to the advantage of the stronger party and the
latter passively received those advantages in the knowledge that the other party was vulnerable. Courts in other
parts of the common law world are much more alive to this problem and not at all hesitant about granting relief.
Capper prefers the broader Commonwealth version of the doctrine, in part because the
narrow English version requires an unhelpful extension to the doctrine of undue
influence in order to catch cases which would otherwise fall outside the definition of an
unconscionable bargain (an example which he cites in this respect is the decision of the
Court of Appeal in 
Credit Lyonnais Bank Nederland NV
 
v. 
Burch
 
[1997] 1 All ER 144).
Instead, Capper advocates a merger of, or at least an accommodation between, undue
influence and unconscionable bargain. He concludes (at p. 419):
A merged doctrine of undue influence/unconscionable bargain would not, it is submitted, generate further
uncertainty than exists already in the common law. On the contrary, by allowing the courts to make a fresh start
with conceptually clear principles, a much more functional doctrine could be created by judicial decisions which
begin from the same sensible 
premises. The certainty so beloved of commercial lawyers would never be found
but this is one area of contract law where justice has a larger role to play and where the parties cannot resolve
all issues in advance by well drafted contractual terms. The uncertainty would be as to the outcome of cases
when the relevant principles were applied, and that is much better than the same kind of uncertainty coupled
with conceptual confusion as to what is truly objectionable about transactions under review. The current
approach of English law, which formally recognises the existence of the unconscionable bargain but never
seems to allow relief on this ground, risks incoherence by extending undue influence into cases … where it does
not belong … if the courts cannot find any clear theoretical basis for distinguishing undue influence and the
unconscionable bargain, the best way forward of all is surely to merge the smaller (undue influence) into the
larger (unconscionable bargain).
SA SMITH, 
‘IN DEFENCE OF SUBSTANTIVE
UNFAIRNESS’
(1996) 112 LQR 138, 145–154
The advocate of substantive unfairness must … explain why substantively unfair
contracts are bad. The enforcement of contracts is presumably a good thing
generally, so some reason for non-enforcement must be provided. But the reason
need not be along the lines that one of the parties coerced, defrauded, or
manipulated the other party (though these are good reasons). All that needs to be
shown, broadly speaking, is that a substantively unfair contract is not the sort of
contract the law should promote. This is an easier standard to meet than the
wrongfulness standard used in duress, fraud and so on. The difference is the same
as the difference between deciding what sorts of activities the state should prohibit,
or at least deter, and deciding what sorts of activities the state should subsidise.
We may be uncertain, for example, whether prostitution should be prohibited, yet
be reasonably confident that brothels should not be subsidised. Contract law—
which is funded from tax revenue—subsidises certain sorts of activities.
Why, then, might a contract’s price affect our valuation of the contract? Five
possibilities present themselves.
Evidentiary value
The first suggestion is that prices are of evidentiary importance. Unfair prices—
understood here as abnormal prices—are not always accompanied by an
invalidating procedural defect, but in some circumstances they are good evidence
of such a defect. If there is a high risk of duress, undue influence, or fraud and the
resulting contract is at an abnormal price, then even without direct proof of
wrongdoing a court might reasonably conclude that wrongdoing has occurred. …
Evidentiary arguments … are of limited interest. Evidentiary arguments do not
provide a reason for caring about the price per se. At most, they merely show that
in a few situations the price of a contract is evidence of something else that is
valuable …
Distributive justice
The most common, non-evidentiary, suggestion for why substantively unfair
contracts should not be enforced is that they upset distributive justice. At first
blush, this seems an unusual suggestion. Distributive justice is traditionally
understood as requiring that common goods be 
distributed fairly amongst the
members of a group or society. Contract law, which deals with two party
interactions, appears unconcerned with the distribution of common goods.
Contract law might, however, be instrumentally important in helping to preserve
a just distribution of such goods. In particular, a requirement of substantive fairness
might be important in maintaining a just distribution of purchasing power. If goods
are traded at fair prices—understood again as normal prices—the trading parties
end up with goods of roughly equivalent value to offer in the market. If they wish,
the parties can, at least in theory, return to their original pre-contract position
(minus transaction costs). Their purchasing power, as determined by the normal
prices of all the goods that the parties own, is unchanged. Substantively unfair
contracts upset the prior pattern of purchasing power and thus, it might be argued,
conflict with distributive justice.
This suggestion is largely immune to the objection that contracting parties will
bargain around redistribution rules, leaving unchanged or worsened the prior
distributional pattern. Substantive fairness, on a distributive justice interpretation,
does not require or support redistributions of purchasing power. It calls instead for
preventing redistributions. This feature of the distributive justice argument,
however, is also its main weakness (leaving aside the controversial issues of the
value of distributive justice generally and the extent, if any, that purchasing power
is a ‘common good’). The distributive justice argument calls for upholding existing
entitlements and therefore it applies straightforwardly only in societies—unlike any
we know of—which are already distributively just. Preserving an unjust distribution
of resources does not promote distributive justice. Indeed, if resources are unjustly
distributed, what are needed from the perspective of distributive justice are
substantively unfair terms … concerns of distributive justice provide at most a very
weak justification for the party-based concerns of substantive fairness.
Facilitating contracting
A third possible reason for caring about contract prices is that contract pricing can
affect individuals’ ability to contract. If, as seems plausible, courts should facilitate
contracting, this is a legitimate concern. There are at least four ways that contract
pricing might inhibit contracting. First, in monopolistic (and monopsonistic) markets
non-competitive pricing causes potential contractors to be priced out of the market.
Monopolistic pricing typically results in fewer contracts, but at a higher price. For
whatever reason contracts are valuable, this is undesirable. Second, the pricing
strategy of situational monopolists can make contracting more difficult. … Third,
and more generally, non-competitive pricing will, even in a competitive market,
reduce contracting overall. … Finally, in situations where one of the contracting
parties is unsure of the normal price for a good, a requirement that goods be sold
at normal prices can facilitate contracting … [I]t seems clear that the reasons these
suggestions provide for caring about contract prices are not reasons based on a
concern for substantive fairness. The fairness of the impugned contracts is in each
case beside the point. Indeed, there is nothing actually wrong with the contracts
themselves in the above examples: what is ‘wrong’ is that other contracts did not or
will not happen. … In short, whatever the merits of assessing contract prices in
order to facilitate contracting, such regulation is not justified by a concern for
substantive fairness.
Autonomy and basic needs
One reason for not enforcing a contract is that it does not support a valuable or
worthwhile activity. The rules regarding so-called immoral or illegal contracts, such
as contracts to sell babies and contracts of self-enslavement, are most naturally
defended (insofar as they can 
be defended) on this basis. The problem with
substantively unfair contracts is different. A substantively unfair contract may
support a perfectly worthwhile endeavour. Yet there is a connection between
substantive fairness and ‘non-valuable’ contracts. The underlying justification for
not enforcing non-valuable contracts is that the state should only lend a hand to
endeavours that help individuals to achieve well-being and thus to realize fulfilling
lives. Worthless activities, even if freely chosen, do not contribute to well-being.
Contract prices can affect contracting parties’ abilities to achieve fulfilling lives.
One explanation of how this can happen draws on the importance, for well-being,
of leading an autonomous, self-directed, life, and, more specifically, on the
importance of having a threshold level of material wealth. It is not necessary to be
rich to lead an autonomous life, but it is necessary to have one’s basic physical
needs met. Individuals whose every choice is dictated by the need to survive
cannot lead autonomous lives. They are unable to direct their lives in any
meaningful sense. A contract at abnormal prices can leave a contracting party in
this position. If the magnitude of the deviation is severe enough, the wealth of the
losing party may be reduced to less than the threshold level.
The problem with contracts that leave contracting parties in poverty is
significant and helps to explain why some contracts at abnormal prices appear so
repugnant. But, again, it is not a problem of substantive unfairness. Contracts
which leave a party in poverty are like contracts of self-enslavement. They are bad,
but they are not unfair (or at least only coincidentally unfair). Fairness is a relative
concept: if someone has been treated unfairly, someone else has been treated
differently. Yet in explaining why a contract that leaves someone in poverty is bad
the situation of the other party to the contract is irrelevant. All we need to know is
that one party has been left destitute. The same is true of contracts of self-
enslavement: all we need to know to condemn such contracts is that someone has
been made a slave. Thus, while some unfair contracts may be objectionable
because they leave one of the parties in a state of poverty, the substantive
unfairness of such contract is not the reason for the objection.
Autonomy and planning
The final reason for caring about contract prices is also founded on the
importance, for achieving well-being, of living an autonomous life. More
specifically, it is founded on the importance of being able to plan and control one’s
life. It is here, I suggest, that the key to understanding the value and meaning of
substantive fairness is found. The problem with substantively unfair contracts is
that they make it more difficult to direct our lives.
An autonomous life, in the sense I use this phrase, requires more than freedom
from coercion. Autonomy is fundamentally a matter of being able to direct one’s
life: we lead autonomous lives, broadly speaking, when we direct our lives to a
significant degree. Autonomous individuals need not live their lives according to
rigid patterns, but they must have a reasonable ability to shape and plan their lives.
Contract law helps us to lead autonomous lives by helping us to achieve valuable
goals and, as importantly, by helping us do this autonomously. It increases our
options and lets us decide what goals to pursue. The enforcement of contracts at
abnormal prices, however, can make it more difficult to lead an autonomous life.
Contracts at abnormal prices upset the material foundations upon which plans and
aspirations are built. Rich or poor, we plan and shape our lives upon assumptions
and expectations about our purchasing power. Contracts at abnormal prices upset
plans and, more generally, individuals’ abilities to control and direct their lives. … A
contract at an abnormal price is similar to an unannounced change in tax policy. It
shifts the purchasing power, leaving the losing party worse-off than before the
contract, and thereby making it more difficult for that party to achieve an
autonomous, that is, self-directed, life. This is true regardless of the justice of the
prior distribution of resources. Of course it is not possible or desirable to 
protect
individuals from all uncertainty. But avoidable, undesired, uncertainty should not be
promoted by the law.
The ‘planning’ justification supports a normal price standard for assessing
contracts. Plans are built upon normal prices. To be sure, courts could ensure that
plans were never upset by imposing fixed prices for all goods. This solution is
undesirable because contracting parties are normally better able than courts to set
prices at mutually attractive levels. Setting fixed prices would make contracting far
less appealing, thus limiting the good that contracting can achieve.
The importance of planning and the relation between shifts in purchasing power
and planning explain why courts should be concerned about contracts at abnormal
prices. But these considerations do not apply equally to all contracts at abnormal
prices. First, not all abnormal price contracts upset planning. In particular,
contracts where either (1) the losing party was making a gift, (2) the losing party
did not care about the price, or (3) the losing party was mistaken as to the nature
and hence value of the good he or she was selling (for example, not realising that
the painting offered was a Rembrandt) do not upset the losing party’s ability to
plan. In the first and third situation the losing party’s expectations were not upset
and in the second case the losing party had no expectations. Such contracts
should therefore be enforced.
A further, more general factor, in considering to what extent planning is upset
by abnormal price contracts is that if the deviation from normal price is small, either
in absolute terms or relative to the contract’s price, then harm to planning, though
not non-existent, is relatively trivial. … A second reason for limiting judicial scrutiny
of abnormal price contracts is that invalidating contracts itself produces uncertainty
and disrupts planning. … Taken together the results of our inquiries into (1) the
harm caused by abnormal price contracts and (2) the ease of avoiding this harm
suggest, therefore, the following general rule. Contracts in which the price deviates
significantly, both in absolute and relative terms, from the normal price and in
which the worse-off party cared about price, was not making a gift, was not
mistaken about the value of the good he or she was selling and was not in a better
position than the gaining party to obtain the normal price should not be enforced.